[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
The most consequential course you will have, and biomedicine for those in the M.D. program,

the most consequential, consequential class in the preclinical curriculum.

And for many students, arguably the most important class, you will take full stop.

So, um, what is cardiovascular pathophysiology and why is it so important?

And, uh, there are a number of ways to answer that.

And hopefully by the end of this lecture, you will have an appreciation for why I begin the class with such grandiose statements.

The purpose of this lecture is as follows.

Um, we're going to talk a little bit about course logistics.

And then um, we'll talk about a typical case.

Yes. On the Beca. Yes I can.

That is an error on my part. And I think last year I made that error almost every time.

Uh, I see. I understood. I will do that now.

I am so sorry. So. But this lecture will begin with a case, and it is a representative case.

Um, it's an amalgamation of many clinical presentations that have been coalesced into one, uh, relatively pithy, um, description.

It's to give you a sense of the, um, cardiovascular disease in the real world.

And how an understanding of.

Basic cardiovascular pathophysiology can help you dissect a patient presentation, the clinical scenario, and reasons why therapies work.

Reasons why therapies fail. For those aspiring physicians, it's very clear why such a such a thing is is an important to grasp.

But for scientists and scholars and for those of you who, um, want to do both.

It's also important because it's illustrative.

Illustrative of how basic understanding of this very physical organ that we can describe quite rigorously and quantitatively.

And how those descriptions help us understand disease mechanisms.

Yeah, the cardiovascular system is a wonderful example of how we can integrate basic

engineering and fundamental physical principles to understand some complex phenomena.

So as opposed to pathology. You guys all took pathology?

Yeah. Everyone here should have taken pathology. Where you have to memorize a whole bunch of stuff.

Yeah. And you look at slides, you have to remember where the different,

the types of cells are and how they're organized and the names and associated things.

Um, in this class, that will not be the modus operandi.

Um, we will, um, learn fundamental principles that you can apply in different settings.

Yeah. And if you have an understanding of those principles, the rest of the the rest of the, uh,

of the behavior of that system becomes very clear, both in a normal state and in, uh, scenarios in which that system is perturbed.

Um. So. I will now.

Send these slides to Rachel and she can upload them.

We normally won't start this late, but we will have we have food coming up.

Yes. Yes. So. So we will um, we will cut into the food time.

Yeah. To to make up for my my being.

My being, uh. Tati. Okay.

So. Rachel. They are.

Now. And to you. And they should be uploaded, uh, shortly.

Okay. So let's start out with some basic.

So just some course logistics. So who is who?

Teaching. Who is teaching this animal? So we have two instructors.

Uh, this is me. And we have also done that must be at some point in the past.

Yeah. And we have, uh, Professor Thomas Heldt.

So Professor Heldt is, uh, Richard Cohen, professor in medical engineering and science, and, um, he is a bonafide engineer.

But I think the more important distinction is that he is, in my estimation, probably the most knowledgeable physiologist on campus.

So we are honored to have him here, um, helping to teach this, this material.

He's also associate director of IBM's. We have some additional people who will be giving some guest lectures.

We have Doctor Usha Tadeo, a colleague of mine. I've known Lucia since medical school.

She directs the clinical Cardiac electrophysiology lab at the Brigham.

She is an MIT alumnus and has taught this class many years.

I don't know how many years she has taught twice over, but.

Undergraduate class if you have a. What?

These. Yeah, that's that's my thing.

Yes, that is correct. And she will talk about rhythm disturbances.

Interpretation of the electrocardiogram. We have Doctor Who. I've known Doctor Herning Bach since he was a cardiology fellow sometime ago.

Um, he's his his, uh, research and clinical interests are really at the intersection of women's health.

And cardiovascular disease, and he has made some very important contributions in this area scientifically.

And he will lecture on that, um, a special series of lectures involving, uh, vulnerable populations.

Cardiovascular disease. We have Doctor Erin Geary.

Doctor Erin Geary is a cardiologist at the Massachusetts General Hospital.

He specializes in intensive care, the treatment of patients who are have critically ill cardiovascular disease.

Um, he's, uh, boarded, I think, both in cardiology and in critical care medicine.

[INAUDIBLE] be lecturing in this class for the first time. I've known him for a very long time.

And Doctor Lao, one of the world's, uh, experts and women's cardiovascular health and cardiovascular echocardiography,

um, and, uh, echocardiography, which is cardiac, cardiac ultrasound.

So we have a panoply of people, I think, covering a wide range of areas.

And I think it gives you a good sort of overview of the field and the state of

the art in terms of cardiovascular disease treatment and its therapy treatment,

and it's therapy, diagnosis and therapy. Materials.

All of you should have access to the canvas site is anyone who does not.

Have people been on to the canvas site to peruse it? If you have not, please do so today.

Very important. If you don't have access, if you are not facile with accessing canvas and the things that are there,

this is how we're going to post homework assignments in which you will upload completed assignment.

Where is Rachel's slide? Oh my goodness.

I did, I was making edits.

I can. I don't think so.

Hold on. There was, there was. I was editing these slides and it must have inadvertently.

And then we have. Here.

Okay. Well, that's a pretty.

No. Excellent. I love it. Okay. Let's go. And.

Yes. And we have our course instructor.

This is a teaching assistant for the second year in a row.

Um, the future doctor, Rachel Zale.

So Rachel is a PhD student in mechanical engineering who works in professor um, Edelman's laboratory.

Um, I think when, um, Rachel took the class.

You. Aced it. Yeah, yeah.

Rank number one. Yes. And, um, prior to joining the Edelman lab, this is.

That's the truth. Um, she completed, uh, research internships involving design mechanical systems for drug delivery applications.

Some of the technologies that we will talk about, impellers and and other sorts.

Rachel is an expert in. So we are honored to have her participate in this class.

Thank you Rachel. So again materials we have canvas.

The textbook should be linked on canvas. All of you should have online access to it.

Len Lilly Pathophysiology of Heart Disease, the newest edition, which is the eighth edition, just came out in 2026.

We will assign reading. Where relevant from this text.

Before the um, corresponding lecture, and we expect everyone to sort of have perused the relevant chapters before lecture.

You can also show you can also use this text as a reference, meaning that if there is something that is covered in class, that is not clear.

You should and we encourage you to go to the text, look for um, to look for the, uh, relevant, relevant, uh, information.

Now, of course, it's not a 1 to 1 correspondence between the things that we covered in this class, because this is an HST class.

We are quantitative in our approach. Um, and, um, that will become apparent in the first after the first couple of lectures.

And that type of quantitation is not expressed in Lilly. But nevertheless you will find qualitative explanations of the concepts that we covered here

that I hope will become that will be complementary to many of the things that we discussed.

Okay by the end of this course. What are our tasks?

You'll be able to describe the gross structure of the myocardium, valves and vessels.

A lot of you should be able to already do this right because you have pathology.

So if I without an exam right now.

Yeah. Yes. You guys are all right in that in the cardiovascular system?

Yeah. Okay, let's put away our. Joking.

You will also. Be able to describe the basic principles underlying normal cardiovascular function.

And its control mechanisms. You will be able to integrate and interpret history, exam findings, social history, clinical data.

And especially. The use of Electrocardiograms.

All of you by the end of this class will become um.

Relative experts. And the physics behind the acquisition of electrocardiogram signals.

And their interpretation. You'll be able to, uh, to predict behavior of the system, the cardiovascular system.

You got to look at it both under normal function and in response to different perturbations.

Many of these perturbations mimic precise disease mechanisms.

So what happens in the setting? Atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, infarction,

death of the myocardium of heart muscles is the heart attack heart failure when the

heart is not able to pump out enough blood to meet the metabolic demands of the body.

Hypertension. High blood pressure. How heart has in a normal state four valves.

Each of those can be associated with disease. Different types of valvular heart diseases and diseases of the pericardium as a sac around the heart.

And electrophysiological abnormalities. Abnormalities in conduction.

So the heart is a pump. That pump is coupled to the movement of ions within the heart, which we loosely refer to as an electrical.

Electrical activity of the heart. The electrical activity. The heart stimulates contraction so you can have diseases in response.

The pump function, how strong the muscle is or how the muscle relaxes, and of the electrical systems.

So we you know, when we talk to patients we like say the heart is, you know, there's a plumbing system, an electrical.

Right. These two things work together in a normal function.

But we can think about their disease states as being somewhat separate. The electrical system and the pump.

We want to recognize abnormal structures grossly and in further clinical manifestations.

So I could give you a heart. It looks abnormal, nothing else.

And by examining the abnormalities, you can predict how that's going to manifest in a patient.

And you want to articulate targets for potential intervention.

Not only do we want to grasp. The disease state.

But we want to know how to affect disease, what additional perturbations we can do to circumvent to mitigate the, um, the abnormal actions.

Um, they have no, uh, they have normal states that we will talk about ad nauseum.

So attendance policy. So we expect that you attend lectures and laboratory exercises.

Um, and in particular we will have guest lectures.

And so attendance is, uh, something that we require.

Now, of course, life happens. And if you cannot attend.

We certainly understand. But we expect to hear from you beforehand.

There's an established HMS um mechanism for um, in a setting where you have absences to let us know.

You can send the instructors myself, Thomas, Rachel an email, but is not acceptable.

Is to just miss a class and tell us about it afterwards.

Unless, of course, it's an extreme, um, situation, an illness or, um, something along those lines.

Barring that, we expect you to be here in class for each lecture.

Consequently, we will have a sign up sheet that will be circulated at the beginning of lecture.

And put away. I would like within a few minutes, ten minutes or so after lecture.

You will not be able to sign afterwards if you're coming in late and you let us know ahead of time, that's fine, otherwise that's it.

So this is the grading how we will, um, decide on the grading.

You see, attendance here is 10%. But I would just want to illustrate.

Now there is a binary step function with respect to, um, attendance.

If you do not attend, if you willfully miss A, do not abide by the attendance policies that I've articulated, you will fail.

Period. And so this these lectures are being recorded.

So I want to make sure that I say that unambiguously that it is, uh, memorialized in a video.

So that we know this at the end of the course.

So that, uh, the policy is clear and unambiguous.

Midterm exam, 20%. And then the final exam.

Uh, 40% is great. So homework I'm going to talk about homework policy.

Problem sets will be posted on the course website. Answers will be due after the due date.

Will specify the due date as well.

You get a zero for no homework, but you can make up 50% of full credit if you submit before the end of end of, uh, end of the course.

Yeah. Now the homework exams are not homework exams.

The homework exercises are not intended. Not intended to cause stress.

Yeah. We're all. The team? Yes.

We like one another. Yes. Excellent.

Yes. So you, uh, you may do them alone, or you may work with others.

The important thing is that we all would like one another.

I'm excluding the faculty. Yeah. Right. Okay, good.

I was hoping to get a full. Yes once I made that clarification.

Um, you can use, uh, all of the available reference material if you work in it in groups.

That is absolutely fine. And you can just please list on the homework who you worked with.

Some of you have particular strengths and, um.

Quantitative aspects. But if you, um. If you are an engineer and if, you know, you know, a lot of differential equations in terms of.

Uh, solving simple circuit diagrams.

Then you may want to partner with somebody who is not so well inclined to form a group with complementary skills that we encourage wholeheartedly.

Please work together. Learn together. We're all in this to learn.

So we have two exams that will be in class. Please make note the midterm exam is April 9th.

And the final exam is the 21st. These are in-class exams.

If you have a conflict with those dates, the sooner you let us know, the better.

The easier that we can make accommodations.

Please do not come to us the day before and say that you cannot make the midterm for X, Y, or Z because the dates are being clearly, um, shown here.

Any questions about the course policy? Grading.

Attendance. Homework. No.

So. Let's get started. Cardiovascular system.

What is a cardiovascular?

So the formal definitions collection of organs including the heart, blood vessels and the blood itself circulates throughout the body.

Pretty simple. Just a little bit more because this is the cardiovascular system.

I want to speak out specifically about the function of the heart.

Now the heart as you all remember. From pathology.

We actually have two hearts. That work in, in, um, that work together?

We have a right heart. And the left heart. The right heart takes blood from the rest of the body.

Doesn't have a lot of oxygen because the body has depleted that blood of oxygen and pumps that blood to the lungs.

The left heart, takes the oxygen rich blood from the lungs and pumps it to the rest of the body.

And this is depicted here. We have the right heart. And the left heart.

So the right heart takes blood from the rest of the body.

To this structure eventually pumps it out to their and to their right, and that goes to the lungs.

So this is the. Yes.

This is the. Excellent.

We'll come back to you. It'll come back to you. Because some of you.

It's been a while since you've taken pathology, right? So it's okay if you don't remember it off.

Off the bat. We'll go over this ad nauseum. And this structure is the.

I'm sorry. The one right. Atrium. And this structure is the.

And this structure is the. And this valve is the.

What was that? Yes. And this valve is the.

Yes. Yes. Yes. And this structure here.

Left atrium. Left ventricle. This is the.

Yes. Sending your order. A order is sending order. I'll take it. I'll take it.

What's this valve? And this valve.

I already felt. So we were going to go over this over and over and over again.

But understanding the basic anatomy of the heart is going to be important.

But you'll see this again and again and you'll you'll see me go over this exercise ad nauseum, that the rest of the body from the upper body,

superior vena cava from the lower body, the inferior vena cava, right atrium, tricuspid valve, right ventricle, pulmonic valve out to them.

That's the pulmonary artery. And all of this is blue because it is relatively oxygen depleted.

Goes to longs to the lungs. Now.

The blood that returns from the lungs is red. Because it's oxygen rich.

Um, it goes from the pulmonary veins into the left atrium.

How many pulmonary veins are there? Normally? How many pulmonary veins are there?

Are you sure? I love it.

Honesty. You are correct. What are you like? Uh. Like those.

Kyle? Yeah. So that's, um. So some of the students here, I know their names because there is a, uh, I in medicine class that I teach.

We just finished it last. January, and that's how I am.

But I'm. But by the end of give me like a couple of weeks,

I'll know the names of everybody on all of the students of some of you I do recognize and I know your.

But. Yes. Okay. Um, right. So there are four pulmonary veins in a normal state.

Go to the left atrium, mitral valve, left ventricle, aortic valve out through the area.

Very simple system. Very simple system. What are the main tasks of the cardiovascular system?

What? What what's the job of the cardiovascular? Yes.

Why is it important to transport blood around body? Yes.

I love it. Let's keep going. Where does oxygen nutrients have to go?

What are some important organs that need oxygen? Oxygen in. Oh my goodness gracious, I love it.

Your first name? Zainab. Zainab.

Excellent. I won't forget that. Uh. Thank you.

So Zainab is absolutely correct. You want to perfused the central nervous system with oxygenated blood?

Yeah. So the most important organ in the body is the heart.

The next is the brain. Yeah. Oh, I should say that my.

I have a predilection to make sure my wife.

And I don't want to get fired from this class. I happen to offend friends of mine.

Okay. Sorry. Joe came to mind when I saw brain and blood.

Brain? Blood and oxygen. Anyway. Yeah, so to perfused the CNS with oxygenated blood.

Yeah, but there are some other things that that the cardiovascular system is meant to do.

So. Transport the transports things.

Nutrients and waste in cells because not only does it have to provide.

The brain and the other organs with critical nutrients, things that it needs to survive to make ATP.

To do the functions that it's normally supposed to do. It's got to take away waste.

Bring them to the kidneys or the liver and other places where these the waste materials are removed.

So communication.

It helps to move hormones from one place where they're created, to other places where they're where the, um, where they affect the action happens.

Antibodies and antibody antibodies and antigens, mainly antibodies,

have to get moved from one place to another place where they're needed, where there's an active infection.

It is a heat exchanger. Yeah.

So when you are very hot, you shunt blood.

To the skin, right? Because the temperature outside is typically lower than what it is inside the body.

And so it's a mechanism to, uh, to cool you off when you're hot, when you're very cold.

Right.

And you want to keep the internal organs warm, you shunt blood away so you get cold and clammy because you want to shunt blood away from the skin.

To the brain and the other organs that might need it. Protection.

Clotting antibodies. Uh, white blood cells.

Infection. Infection. If there is damage in a particular in the skin or a vessel,

you need to transport the appropriate clotting materials, proteins involved in clotting to those areas.

So the cardiovascular system is responsible for a vast array of things.

Um, this is typically what we categorize as being the most important function.

But I want to make it clear that there's a panoply of other things.

That the cardiovascular, um, system is, um.

Uh, controls. And we will touch on these. Not only this, but we will touch on each of these as we go through this, uh, as we go through the class.

Now cardiovascular disease. What is it?

We typically categorize cardiovascular disease by the vascular bed.

Um, that is affected. So for example, stroke, transient ischemic attack, Tia the vessels that go to the head.

The extra cranial vessels that supply the head, carotid, and vertebral or intracranial vessels.

Right. There are blockages here that prevent blood flow to the to the brain.

In the case of an embolic stroke. And you can have death of, um.

Not portions of the brain. As a result, if the blockage is severe.

Coronary artery disease, coronary heart disease, myocardial infarction again just to be purposely repetitious.

Infarction. Death of the myocardium. Death of the heart muscle.

Heart attack. Angina pectoris.

What is angina pectoris? What does that mean?

Chest pain. Yeah. Angina. Pain pectoris.

Chess. Yeah. That's a literal interpretation of Angela pectoris.

But we will see that patients with atherosclerotic coronary artery disease have a particular type of pain.

So there's a prior I'm applying to this. All the while the interpretation is very clear.

Mike Tyson in his prime punched me in my chest.

I have pain, but that's typically not what we refer to as angina pectoris.

Yeah, Angela pectoris has a particular characteristic that is not quite Partha mnemonic,

but but very much associated with the heart not getting enough blood.

Deaths from coronary artery disease. Massive myocardial infarction can lead to death of a lot of muscle.

Muscle doesn't pump and you die. We can have disease of the aorta.

And typically most of that disease is atherosclerotic, though some of it is congenital.

You can be born with, uh, strictures, um, or um, um, uh, aneurysms, dilation of the of the aorta,

not because of atherosclerosis, but typically we mean in this disease of the, of the um, of the aorta.

And we'll talk at length about that as well. And then finally the lower vessels.

And that's peripheral arterial disease. We'll talk about that as well. These are the big breakdowns in terms of of what is um.

Of the different vascular beds, and we'll touch on all of this as of course.

So cardiovascular disease, why is it important? So cardiovascular disease.

Let's talk about a particular type of cardiovascular. Let's talk about atherosclerosis.

Right. So there are about 60. People in this room?

Yeah. What fraction of the people in this room have atherosclerosis?

I'm sorry. Yeah, I think I've asked you guys this question before.

So so so we have one vote for everyone.

Everyone in this room. Any other votes? What's your name?

Tiffany. So that's a very good guess because you certainly include the people that have gray hair, right?

That's myself. Thomas. You've always had that hair color.

Excellent. Okay. Yeah, I see, I see.

Excellent. Yeah. So 75% is a good. I just try to count up exactly how many people would be on the older side of this.

But you would imagine, naively that the younger people here, people on the lower end of the spectrum, do not have it, but the older individuals do.

It's a very reasonable guess. Any other guesses? So let's try to be quantitative in how we how we answer this.

What do the data say. So prevalence and risk.

There was an interesting paper published in 2012 about, um, the risk of atherosclerosis arising from autopsies.

So if you look at young men who died in the Korean War, 77% of them showed evidence of atherosclerosis.

So these are men in their 20s. Few of them in their late teens.

And I will say that the autopsies at this point, in terms of looking for atherosclerosis were very just gross description.

You look at the specimen and you see if there's something that looks like it. It wasn't really very detailed.

If you look similarly at men who died in the Vietnam War in the 60s, about 45% and then 8% of men in the military who died between 2001 and 2000.

Evidence of arthroscopy. These are gross. Gross. Yeah.

Now, this is relative prevalence in a very young population that you would not expect.

And you know, this particular type of, of of population in the Korean War and then the Vietnam War.

This is when, um, the military used to give out cigarets.

So the prevalence of smoking was quite high.

So you could argue, well, how you know, representatives of the, uh, these data are what is happening today in 2026.

So there are a series of additional autopsy studies on young individuals who died in horrific circumstances.

Let's say, um. Suicide or.

Um. Um. Let's see.

Uh. Motorcycle crashes. Right. And if you do more sensitive tests, there's, uh, specific things that you can do.

Virtually all of them have signs of atherosclerosis.

Atherosclerosis is a disease of the juvenile.

The default is. Most people have it.

Not everyone dies from it. Not everyone suffers the sequelae of the diseases that I talked about in the previous slides.

And that's something that we really don't understand. But it is the most one of the most prevalent disorders.

And in the history of mankind. Now.

So we all have it. Not everybody suffers from it.

But why does that mean we should pay attention to it? Right? Most everyone has ten fingers, right?

Most everyone has. Um, many people have.

Um, at some point in their life, um, some skin disorder.

Eczema. But should we worry about them? Yeah. What's special about cod?

I guess my guess. My point is, a prevalence in and of itself is not dispositive that it's a problem.

Yeah. But again, in a data driven way.

Looking at the data that are available, the lifetime risk of cardiovascular disease is about 50%.

Impatient 30 years or older. It is a leading cause of death.

In developed countries and across the world.

Now, if you look at this map in terms of the mortality per 100,000 100,000 people, and these are the precise numbers.

This is the United States. All right. We've got here in the green area.

But if you look at large parts of Russia and Asia. The prevalence is quite high, significantly higher than what it is in the United States.

And we think about this as being an important problem in the US. But it's a worldwide problem in many parts of Africa as well.

Cardiovascular disease is highly associated with adverse outcomes, death being one.

And in talking about the global risk of death, you could you can break this down differently into the precise diseases rheumatic heart disease.

We'll talk about this. This often leads to valvular heart disease.

Most notably mitral stenosis is a consequence of rheumatic heart disease is an infection related that causes strep,

typically causes um, causes inflammation around the mitral valve, and can lead to my lifting of that valve.

And here you can see the different areas right.

And age standardized mortality rate. And some of the, you know, some of the areas are central.

I'm sorry, Central America.

Um, there we have looking at it's easier to see my computer than this in North Africa, in the Middle East, quite high scheming heart disease.

We think about mainly, um, sorry about this disease.

Rheumatic heart disease is more prevalent in those areas that are a little somewhat underdeveloped,

but it is still an important, important, um, disorder, especially in India and in parts of the um.

And in parts of the. If I've many cases.

Actually, many patients have presented in any way with rheumatic heart disease.

Um. In part because of poor access to care and in many parts of Africa as well.

I think I've seen cases of patients with rheumatic heart disease from Kenya and.

And Uganda as far as a few other, a few other places as well. Very prevalent.

The point that I want to make here is that there are many of these disorders all throughout the world.

This is and this is sort of a way of breaking down the information in this slide in a disease specific manner.

But the point is to say. So if you look at risk factors for cardiovascular disease.

The things that are associated with adverse outcomes. We have high blood pressure.

And if you look at some of the previous studies as a free for heart study,

and there was another study, the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.

Hundreds of thousands of patients. And if you look at some particular, um, cohorts, the relative prevalence of high blood pressure.

Abnormal cholesterol so high LDL. We'll talk about this as well.

It's a risk factor for coronary artery disease diabetes.

The prevalence is pretty pretty high. Relatively high 38% in males 33% in females in Framingham Heart Study above 25% above 1 in 4.

And similar statements apply to LDL low HDL as well.

Why not try to get across here is that not only is cardiovascular disease prevalent, but the risk factors for cardiovascular disease are prevalent.

So we can talk about those that have cardiovascular disease.

And those that have adverse events because of cardiovascular disease.

But then there is this pipeline, a whole stream of patients that have significant risk factors that will develop cardiovascular disease.

So those are currently have it. And a prevalence associated with cardiovascular disease are 2026.

But then there is a people down the pike.

That will develop it, and there is no slowing of the people that have risk factors for developing cardiovascular.

Risk factors for cardiovascular disease are synergistic meaning that.

So if you looked at those with high blood pressure, um, let's say those with a very high blood pressure,

systolic blood pressure of 170mm, but a normal systolic blood pressure.

One 20mm of mercury. Yeah. Uh, what's the normal diastolic blood pressure?

Okay, so you guys are all right? I was okay. I'll take it.

I'll take it. There. Cut offs. Depending. We'll talk about later. But yes, that's generally correct.

So one 70mm of mercury. And you can see that the risk if you're relatively mature.

Yeah. Is, um. And so, for example, if you look at here, this at x axis is a, this is a total cholesterol HDL.

And if you have high blood pressure but you're mature it's much much higher because age is a risk factor than your reference if you don't have it.

Yeah. So high blood pressure in and of itself is additive.

If you add on additional risk factors. Yeah. Depending on the risk factor, the risk goes up.

Okay, so I think I've made the point here. I don't think I need to belabor this anymore.

The main point that I want to get at is, um, there are part of this class you will learn about.

Um, how patients present with cardiovascular disease and the pathophysiology involved.

So I want to go through a typical case of a patient that presented.

Um, with a series of disturbances that we will discuss.

Many of the terms that you won't understand will be alien to you.

We're going to discuss this case twice. First in the beginning of the class today, and then we'll discuss it at the end of the class.

We'll try to do an analysis now. Given that we have really not much in the way of background other than pathology.

And, and, uh, I think it's interesting to see the difference in terms of how you view the how you view the case.

The beginning of the class, as opposed to how you view it at the end of the. So I'm going to begin with a history of the present illness.

So all of you will take ICM. Yeah.

All of you in. The HST program will take ikm.

There are some people here who are not, but all of the HST students will. And in ICM you will interact with health care professionals.

If you are in Memphis and if you are an MD student, you will, um, do the same.

Some scenarios you will be the health care professional presenting to someone else.

Presentations of patients happen in a particular format.

The first part of that is the chief complaint.

What they came in with and then the history of the present illness describes why the patient came into the hospital and what they presented.

With. So this patient is an 85 year old male who presented to a suburban hospital emergency department.

Complaining of chest discomfort. Shortness of breath. And sweating.

Another word for sweating is dire for. His heart rate was 35 beats per minute.

And his blood pressure was 75 over 40mm of mercury.

So we talked about a normal blood pressure. What's a normal heart rate?

I'm sorry. It was that. Yeah. So normal. Resting heart rate.

60 to 100. So this is low.

He has a prior history of heart disease. So this is not really specified.

It's nonspecific. That's the most that you could get from the patient at the time.

High blood pressure. Also notable also known is hypertension, diabetes and high cholesterol.

So then he had an electrocardiogram done. Now.

Electric car geography 101. So an electrocardiogram, you're measuring electric, um, the electrostatic surface potential on the skin.

As a function of time. So electrons, the skin move around a lot.

Conductance is. It's pretty. It's pretty conducted.

Yeah. And they move around in response to what is happening in the heart.

So you can think about the heart each time it pumps is moving around ions.

Yeah. So let's say at some particular time. Time zero.

In the heart. You have a positive charge right underneath the sternum.

Right? Right in front of the heart, right underneath the sternum, because that's where the heart sits.

Then you can have lots of negative charges. We call this on the skin.

Over that positive charge grade. Let's say a time delta t now in the heart, you have a negative charge right underneath the sternum.

Yeah. Those negative charges are going to move away.

Yeah. So you can. So if I were, if I had a probe that can measure the electrostatic surface potential right on the chest.

Right. I would see the change because of these movement of electrons.

And I could infer the charge distribution on the underlying heart.

Does that make sense? So by measuring the electrostatic surface potential.

Something easily that we can do.

By placing probes on pre-defined parts of the body, I can get a sense of the charge distribution, how charges are moving in the heart.

That is clinical cardiology. Yeah.

Now, the special sauce is that depending on where the electrodes are, you're getting different views.

Of how the ions move around the heart. Yeah, and a typical electrocardiogram has 12 views.

And these views are called leads. We will go through all of this in detail.

But just to give you a heads up, this is lead one. The two.

Three. Three more leads AVR, AVL, AVF.

And it's six more lanes v1 v2 v3 before b5 v6.

Yeah. So the way that this works is the machine starts recording the electrostatic surface potential at different points,

and it has a linear combination of them and prints out the amplitude.

On each of the leads. So here it has all of these data.

It's like ten different places. Typically. That you measure the electrostatic surface potential and it uses some of them.

There's a linear combination of some of them and prints out the result of that math here.

Then it switches after about 2.5 seconds.

Switches and puts out a linear combination of some other.

Some of the group switches again. Prints out a linear combination of some other group switches and puts out a linear combination.

Does that make sense? So it's all of these data from these ten different spots are being quoted simultaneously.

But it only prints out information from some of them at each 2.5 minute increments.

That's a standard electrocardiogram. Yeah. So all of these are simultaneous.

All of these are simultaneous. All of these are similar. All of these are simultaneous.

Yes. That is, it's doesn't have to all make sense.

Now, this is just all a prelude. We'll talk about this in detail.

We'll talk about the projections. How it works, the mathematics behind it, and exactly what the linear combinations are associated with.

Yes. Nation. Yeah, it's a good point because these represent different directions.

How do I say this?

So the the the, um, you could model the ionic changes in the heart at any particular time as one net dipole in three dimensional space.

All of these charges. It's a three dimensional structure. So you could create one dipole.

Yeah. So you want to understand how that dipole changes with time.

Yeah. So, um, you need two axes to do this, right?

It'd be very hard to understand. Yeah.

You can try to reduce this, reduce the dimensionality of this in a manner so that you can understand and map it back onto a three dimensional.

Place. Um, so some of these give you information on one plane.

So for example, all of these are in one plane.

And all of these are projections in an orthogonal plane.

It's all an attempt to get a three dimensional picture of how this dipole is moving with time.

We need a few lectures to get into it, if it should all be transparent.

But if you did them all at once, it'd be hard to know where it's moving in three dimensions.

That that's that's the reason why to do it piecemeal in this way.

There is a boundary constraint, I have to say, because you want to place the electrodes in places that are easily accessible.

Yeah, because you could imagine. Why not just place them in places where you'd get.

Right. You know these two axes, right? Right.

That you could actually do this. I in one plane?

Yeah. Yeah. But, um, do you really want to.

But, you know, somebody comes in there ill. Do you want to get them to disrobe so you can put it all?

Yeah. So the places where it's put is a boundary constraint, and you have to work with that.

Does that make sense? Kind of. Yeah. There was another question.

Yes, ma'am. You. This is one instantaneous picture over 10s.

Yeah. Does that make sense? Yeah. Okay.

So in addition to these 12 leads. You often in a in this electrocardiogram, you present data from just one.

There's no switching here. So here, these lines mean this line.

You switch from this lead and you take another view to another linear combination,

this line to another linear combination, this and then another linear combination.

This is just one particular lead. Each of these.

You see these big spikes? These negative spikes here.

This is all the same phenomena, just different views of it. This is all one heartbeat.

All. One heart beat. Just different views. One heartbeat.

Different views. These big things here. One heartbeat.

When the ventricle contracts, the left ventricle contracts and it pumps blood out into the aorta.

That's what this corresponds to. Yeah.

Yes. So the y axis is in millivolts.

It's a unit of, uh, potential energy. Uh, volts.

Is that the potential energy per unit charge?

Yeah. And, um, the direction of it does tell you something about where the net current dipole is oriented with respect to that lead.

Yeah. So.

Yeah. So. So part of this has to go with it. Um, roughly, yes.

The reason why I'm, I'm hedging is because the definition definition of a lead is not the same as an electro.

So this is a result of a linear combination of some of the electrodes.

Yeah. So if the answer isn't well it's in the direction of that particular electrode.

We did a little bit more math. I didn't want to say math.

It's so simplistic. I'm maybe going to call it math to such an old group of scholars.

We need to do some more stuff, right, to make this quantitative.

Right. Yeah. Okay.

So this pumping of the ventricle, each of those pumping up the ventricles.

Yeah. Most notably the left ventricle. Now.

I said that the heart rate was about 35 beats per minute.

Yeah. That would be sad. Think.

But I think that's what we said. Yeah. So I could in a way, if I want it to be a big pain in big.

But yeah, I would ask you what's the paper speed.

Yeah. Because this each of these corresponds to a beat.

Including this. That's a B-2. It's a 10s long.

And you can tell me approximately what the paper speed is, but I'm not going to do that.

But I want the reason I mention that is because you could deduce the heart rate from this.

If I told you the paper speed, I actually already did, right?

So it was 10s and you could count this up. How many beats in 10s?

We get the heart rate? Yeah. The bottom. It says on the board.

Oh, yes. Yeah. But I think. Did you all see that?

No. See? They didn't say anyway. Okay.

So now we'll do this, and then we'll take a break because of coffee.

Coffee's here. So this is contraction. When we talk about a heartbeat, that's really what we mean.

Contraction of the left ventricle. Yeah.

Because you feel your pulse. That's really what you're doing, right?

Left ventricle pumps out to the carotid to the radial artery.

And with each pulsation, you're feeling the beat of the left ventricle.

Yeah, but. In pathology.

I think you learned about how the heart beats. Because they're up.

These are proportions of the heart. What are they called again? The atria.

Yeah. How does that work? You did learn this in pathology, didn't you?

The brick. Brick did tell you about the heart? Yeah. Yeah.

Yes. Yeah. So how does that work?

The atria and the ventricles. How do they. How do they beat? I'm going to call Professor Mitchell right now.

Yes. What is your name? Keon. Excellent.

That is exactly right. So. But there's a ventricle.

But you. But there is atrial contraction before the ventricles.

And in a normal electrocardiogram the atrial contraction is manifest here.

So in a normal state atrial contraction precedes ventricular contraction.

Yes. Yeah. So if I told you that each of these was ventricular contraction, you'd say,

well, Colin, there's supposed to be something right before every ventricle.

That corresponds to HL contraction. Yeah. So this egg has the red arrow sign.

This is not a physiologic. This stuff is illogical. Yeah. This red arrow.

Somebody drew this in. Yeah. And you know what this is?

You know, this is denoting. P waves which correspond to the.

Atrial contraction. So this.

Something's wrong here. Yeah, because before every ventricular contraction, you should see a p wave.

And after every p wave you should see a ventricular contraction.

Yeah, right. P wave.

Nothing. Oh, here's a contraction.

P wave. Nothing. P wave. There's a ventricular contraction here.

But you see how close this p wave is to here. And see how far away this is to hear.

P wave. Nothing P wave. You see how far away this is from here?

Yeah. So this is odd. Very very odd.

So this is an example of complete heart block.

The atria are beating. And if you time this out, this is a very regular regular rate.

And the ventricles are beating at a very regular rate. And they don't see one another.

They have divorced themselves of one another. Yeah.

So that the atria doing whatever they want, the ventricles are doing whatever they want.

And this is an abnormal state. Abnormal state. So this is.

Sinus rhythm with complete heart block.

Sinus rhythm because atria are beating. That's happening just like it's supposed to.

Just as was articulated in a very, um. Uh, very erudite fashion.

Previously, the atria contracts because the electrical impulses start at the sino atrial node,

which is near the intersection of the superior vena cava in the right atrium.

And the atria be. And I can.

We'll know why I say that later on, but you can take my word for it for now.

These are normal sinus beats. The problem here is a communication between the atria and the ventricles.

That's gone. So the ventricles are doing their own thing.

Atria are doing their own thing. So there are also changes.

Showing signs of myocardial ischemia. These are the SD segments here.

They're kind of downsloping. They don't look normal.

We can infer that the heart's not getting enough blood, because when the heart doesn't get enough blood,

the ionic channels, the currents associated in the heart are abnormal.

Yeah. Why is that? Well, you can think about it.

That the, uh, these, um. Some of these channels and their maintenance are ATP dependent.

If the parts of the heart are not getting enough blood, ATP production is impaired.

Yeah. And it manifests itself as electrical abnormalities that you could see on the electrocardiogram.

And there's a few other things. Left axis deviation right by the branch block.

The main thing I want to focus on is this, which I hope that is clear after this discussion,

these other things we will talk about later on in the class.

Okay. Let's take a five minute break now and we can get some coffee and we'll come back.

Okay, let's get started. So.

Yeah. So the upshot from this electrocardiogram that patient presents the heart rate is 35 beats per minute.

And again, by the heart rate, we mean these impulses.

I'm just going to keep going. Um, 35 beats per minute.

Each of those represents the left ventricle. Yep.

And then we talked about that. Normally there are atrial contractions precede the ventricular contractions in an orderly fashion.

So before every one of these peaks I'm going to refer to this as a curious complex.

We'll talk about that later. Should be preceded by a p wave.

And after every P wave should be a complex.

This is not the case here. What we do see is that the P waves march out and have their own regular rhythm.

And then these spikes of QRS complexes have their own regular rhythm and these rhythms.

So the rates rather are different or different. So that's why this is complete heart block.

There is a block between communication of the atria and the ventricles that we can deduce from the service.

Yes. How do you diagnose?

Yeah. Good. Great. Great question, great question. So the formal definition of TEC cardio is a heart rate greater than 100.

Yeah. So so you can see tachycardia. Right.

Just based on the heart rate. It doesn't really say about the rhythm.

So I want to distinguish between the rate and the rhythm.

Tachycardia as a word is about the rate. What's your first name?

Jackie, it's a great question. So the technicality it's a it's a statement about the rate.

What? I think you're referring to a sinus rhythm. Right.

Sinus tachycardia. So that's when the heart rate is greater than 100 beats per minute.

So each of these. Would be 100 beats per minute and 10s you'd see right coming in ten, ten, ten.

Yeah. Okay. Right. You know what I mean? Right.

So, um, but you would, um. Before each of these, you'd see a P wave.

There'd be none of this other stuff. A wave like before. None of this other stuff.

So it's being driven by the sinus node. And there was an air contraction.

Atrial radius 100 or greater. And the ventricular rate is 100 or greater.

Does that make sense? Please interrupt me with any questions.

Yes. Or. Yes.

Yes. That's right. That's right. So the ventricular rate corresponds to the pulse.

So that is what we refer to as the heart rate. In describing what you see on an electrocardiogram, you're describing more.

Describing sort of the internal dynamics of the heart. So there's an atrial in of a tricolor, right.

Yeah. And they may not be the same. Yep.

So the verbiage that goes with the description of the electrocardiogram,

it's much more than just the heart rate which is typically just the left ventricular rate.

Makes sense. There's another question. Yeah. So, um.

How did the. So they.

Fact. So great.

Great question. So what we will learn. Is that each portion of the heart has its own pacemaker.

So the pacemaker that dominates is the single atrial node.

Which causes contraction of the atria. If that doesn't work, then the next fastest pacemaker takes over.

So if there's no communication between the atria and the ventricle.

Yeah. Then the ventricle itself has its own set of pacemaker cells.

Some of them reside in the AV node. Gives a certain rate.

If the AV node fails, then there are.

There are other pacemaker cells that are low that are lower down in the circuit.

So that's that makes sense. And it's an evolutionary response.

Right. Because if you didn't, you would die. Yeah.

So the ventricle here is functioning because it has its own set of pacemaker cells that control the heart rate.

When it's not able to see any signals from above. Uh.

The questions. Yes, please. Yes.

And then snap a close. No, no, it's not good.

You got to tell me how to do it correctly. You got to tell me how to do it correctly.

I know it's spelt, but did you have to correct me when I'm wrong?

Because I will get it correct. Apologies. Um, so the, uh.

Right in a normal state, right.

The impulse begins in the atria, the sign gets propagated to the atria, then gets conducted down to the ventricles and the ventricles.

Wait until they see that impulse from above.

You can think about this as a question about time constants. Yeah.

So the ventricular pacemaker cells have a long time constant.

So something else arrives. In between then.

Then it'll conduct. Yeah. But if the time is is very long and it doesn't see anything, then it will fire.

Does that make sense? Yes. Other other questions.

Okay. We will have plenty of time to go over this again and again as as, um, as a course goes on.

But the upshot here. Sick patient, low heart rate.

We understand why the heart rate is low now. Because there is a problem with communication from the atria to the ventricles.

Um, yeah. So this would be if if there was a QRS after every P, the heart rate would be like 100, 100 beats per minute.

So. So if if the conduction was normal, the atria are beating fast because they want.

Yeah. They want the, um they want the heart to beat quickly.

They want the heart rate to be fast because the blood pressure is low. And it's an attempt to keep the blood pressure normal.

It's a compensatory response. But the problem is the ventricles don't see any of this, which is why the heart rate is so low.

Yeah. Okay.

So management, how is this patient managed? So the ventricles are not seeing enough electrical impulses coming from the atria.

So what can we do? Well, maybe. Can we supply electrical impulses?

Give it to the ventricle. That's what. That's what this is. This was an attempt at, um, external pacing.

So these. Are pads placed on the chest and they conduct current between them.

Right. So the goal is you administer current passes through the heart.

Yeah. Because the heart's in the pathway between these two.

And it's. And you do this at a regular, um, rate, maybe 100 impulses, um, per minute.

Yeah. And to get the heart rate up. Yeah.

Now, this is kind of painful, right? Because you're actually getting shocked.

100 times per minute. That's not a lot of voltage, but it's, you know, something a little bit uncomfortable.

So you do this typically when somebody is in extremis, right.

When they are very ill. And you and you want to get the heart rate up.

Now, I have to say, in my career, which is, uh, over 30 years or so, I have, I can't remember the number of times I've seen this work.

This almost never works. I don't even go to this anymore.

I think I spoke to usher Tatro, who's an electrophysiologist who has, you know, this is what her bread and butter is.

And she claims that she has seen this work a few times. I'm not sure I believe her, but we'll have that fight when she lectures.

Yes. Um. Yeah, right.

Yes. So this does not fix the problem. This does not fix the immediate.

Uh, this does not fix the the causal insult that led to this.

That's not the purpose of this. The blood pressure 75 of a 40.

And the heart rate is 35. Your goal at that point in time is to get the blood pressure up.

And the patient needs a higher heart rate. And so this is an intervention to increase the heart rate.

And you're right in a sense, whether it's successful or not depends on what the causal insult is.

But the immediate thing is to get the heart is to get the blood pressure up. And and you do that by getting the heart rate up.

You may not. There's no guarantee that this will work. If the muscles are dead.

Right. And this is not going to work.

Yeah, but in terms of the things that you have in your tool kit, in an emergency situation, the task is to get the heart rate up.

You still have to deal with the causal insult, right?

But let's say this person needs a patient needs a procedure that takes time.

Yeah, and you're trying to keep them alive. You can get to that point where you can do, um, a definitive procedure to fix the problem.

Does that make sense? I think Kate had. Yes.

Yeah. Um, I think so. I. Given situation.

The priority priorities. Uh.

It's a it's a good question. Right. So you could envision scenarios where this is in the long term.

Um, may be harmful, but if this patient is dead on the way to the cath lab en route.

Yeah.

So there is a series of, uh, when somebody is in extremis, we have a series of things that we it's, uh, uh, you know, basic life support for ACLs,

advanced cardiac life support, and the, the that's an algorithm that that is, uh, a list of interventions that you do given situations like this.

It's precisely to prevent people from thinking about it.

And to go directly to interventions that will fix the short term problem, get the blood pressure up, get the heart rate up.

So part of ACLs, somebody has a low heart rate.

Yeah. And it's hypertensive pacing pads. Right.

So the intention of the ACLs algorithm so that anybody could use it doesn't have to know anything about pathophysiology.

And it's precisely in these scenarios where it's life or death.

Time is of the essence. And you're trying to get a blood pressure or a heart rate back to where it's supposed to be.

That's not to say that at the end of the day, whether this has any long term sequelae, but that's a second order consideration.

Does that make sense? I know you. Yes.

So so there are so there are, um, devices and we'll, we'll touch on this later on.

But the the problem is it takes time to do that because you need a specialist to put that in.

So there are devices that you could put in that would pump without actually doing what you say.

But then this patient has to go to the cath lab. They need an interventional cardiologist who is there to be able to put it.

So that is something definitely. But it's not a first order thing.

First order of things, a boundary constraint, constraints. They have to be easy and fast.

You don't need a specialist to do. Does that make sense?

Not sure. Okay. Other questions?

Yeah. Please. Uh, no. Part of that.

Yeah. So it's a great it's a great question. And I think it's most likely to cause an arrhythmia if the shock is not well timed with a natural rhythm.

There are periods of the cardiac cycle where the heart is most vulnerable to developing arrhythmia.

And if you deliver a shock on that point. Absolutely. So these, um, pace is timed to ensure that those vulnerable periods are protected.

So as much as one can, you try to control for the fact that you're not going to, um, um, cause an arrhythmia with pacing patterns,

and it's typically not that much of a problem because a patient's heart rate is so low. You have lots of time.

You know, in between this, what I'm saying in which you can deliver to deliver these impulses.

Other questions. No, please interrupt me if any others.

Um. Come along. So again, um, pacing pads almost never work.

Never work. But it's eclgs and it's what we do.

So instead of more definitive therapy. Is a trans feeling venous pacing wise, we put the pads on.

You try. It doesn't work. Now you have to do a procedure. So this is not something that anybody can do.

But this is the sort of thing that a first year cardiology fellow could do.

Yeah. You just need a suite in which you can take do this under fluoroscopy.

Sometimes you can do it blind, but typically it's on the fluoroscopy. You go in through a major vessel.

In this case it's the internal jugular or the brachial vein.

And you thread a catheter. It's usually through the internal jugular.

It's just easier easier to get to into superior vena cava.

Right atrium and into the right ventricle.

And it gets stuck there in the apex of the right ventricle, and you deliver electrical impulses directly to the heart.

Very high success rate. If you get into the right place.

So then and in addition to this, give I.V. medications.

To try to increase the blood pressure.

As has been stated and, uh, intimated or explicitly stated is that some of these medications can make the heart worse.

They make the heart work more and the heart is already struggling. But again, goal here gotta get blood to the brain and the other vital organs.

Yes, Jackie. Well, I knew somebody was going to ask me that.

I knew somebody was going to ask me that. That's a good question. Actually, I don't know.

The tip is metal. The material is. I'm not quite sure.

I'll have to get back to you on that. Absolutely. Mhm.

It's a great question. Yeah. So this is why this is typically done under fluoroscopy.

So you want to take images and you can visualize the um the catheter as it goes into the heart.

The area that's the most prone is sort of the anterior wall of the right ventricle cause it's thin.

Yeah. So you just want this to go in and to make some contact.

With a right ventricular apex. It's not screwed in.

So one of the problems with this is if you move around, it'll come out in more capture.

These things almost never stay in for a long period of time because they're not secured to the right ventricle.

Yeah. If you move around, it'll come loose and it has to be readjusted or it won't capture and and so forth.

Yeah. Please. It's a good question.

It's a good question. Typically, these things are not all here for a long time.

And so we don't um, and the coating on the, on the catheter itself is resistant to um, to um, to clotting.

So we typically don't typically don't. Surprising, huh?

Uh oh. Did I say that something bad?

Yeah. Um, I will find out, and I will.

I will let you know, I promise. Promise. That is my my bad.

Okay. Um. Other questions. Yes.

Okay. So. Now, given that the patient required a high level of care, there were sent to some other local hospital we call non Mass General Southwest.

And. But while enroute to this place, that should be here.

Um, developed something called pulseless for tricolor tachycardia and lost consciousness.

This is their electrocardiogram. Compare this.

To the egg. So before this was a normal contraction.

Of the left ventricle. This.

Very different, right? This is ventricular tachycardia.

Each of these complexes represents a beat of the ventricle.

Very very fast. Very very fast.

Very very abnormal. Here the beats are originating, originating not from the normal conduction system but from the ventricular myocytes itself.

So there's a there is a small is a, uh, a small region of bias sites that are electrically active.

This can happen in the setting of things like myocardial ischemia.

And they start to beat on their own at a very fast rate, and a beating so fast that the ventricle doesn't have enough time to fill.

So each pump. Brings out a very little amount of blood, so you can't feel a pulse.

Now if you have a normal heart. And you have a ventricular rate of 210.

You'll actually probably be fine.

I bet some individuals in this room have gotten their heart rate up to 200 before and in some in some settings, and you're fine.

But if you have a sick heart, an abnormal heart, like one that is ischemic,

so that mechanical properties of the heart are different than a normal state, this is can be fatal.

No pulse that producing anything. So then, uh, sorry, this was an amalgamation of different cases.

So I've picked up all of the stuff that's getting mixed up. Yes. Kyle.

Yeah. So I guess in the in the context of. Part it is.

Yeah. It's good.

That's a good question. Good question. Here. I have no idea what the atria are doing, and the ventricles don't care.

The atria could be beating normally. The atria could be fib relating.

You know, it could be tech, it could be tachycardic from a different site.

There's no information contained here about the HSA.

I am an authority agnostic, and maybe that's probably the appropriate word as to what the diagnosis of the atrial rhythm is.

Yeah. Okay.

Upon arrival to the hospital, this patient was taken immediately to the categorization lab where they had a catheter based car.

During Anjum, you could tell I've merged two cases here. Um, so they had a they had a cardiac catheterization.

Because this is a case that is very concerning for ischemia.

So that means that there are regions of the heart that are not being supplied sufficient blood, not getting enough oxygen.

And so they're sick. You say how the your you're not supplying the conduction system with enough oxygen.

So you have heart block. You're not supplying the myocardium with enough oxygen, so it's not pumping correctly, so the blood pressure's low.

This is kind of one unifying diagnosis that explains it.

And moreover it's a diagnosis that we could potentially fix.

So if you visualized the vessels that feed the heart, you could see if they're normal and if they're blockages, they're.

So what is a cardiac catheterization? So, um, this is a procedure where you thread a catheter up into the aorta to the heart,

and you inject dye in the vessels that feed the heart, and you're taking pictures.

So this is also done with fluoroscopy. And so you can determine whether there are blockages in those vessels.

So typically we go through the wrist at most in 2026 radial artery.

And then we thread a thin catheter. Don't ask him what material this is made of.

I won't know but I'll know next time. Um goes up to the heart here.

Backwards into the aorta. Ascending aorta.

Yeah, you can all see this is one route we used to go through the groin to do this.

But, um, nowadays it mainly goes through the, through the radial artery, through the arm.

And then when you're up into the aorta, you can place the catheter, you can position the catheter.

This is that same catheter. So that it, um, enters.

One of the vessels that feeds the heart. You can inject, dye and take pictures.

Yeah. So this is called a catheter based coronary angiogram.

Do you remember the vessels that feed the heart? Yeah.

This is not. Yeah. Right. Right, right. Coronary artery.

That's one of them. This applies the right ventricle typically, and the inferior wall of the left ventricle and 80% of, uh, 80% of people.

Then there is another vessel here. That's.

What is that? Left coronary. Let's call it the left main.

Left main. The left main divides into two vessels.

And. The conflicts. So I don't expect everybody to know this.

But just just for reference there. The right coronary artery.

And the left main are the two big vessels that come off of the aorta.

Left main branches into the left anterior descending.

And then this one you can see goes around the back here. And the left circumflex.

Those are the main vessels that feed the heart and in patients that have large heart attacks.

Right. Like that in a presentation akin to what this patient presented with,

you worry that there are blockages in these main vessels, because that's the thing that will kill this patient.

Yep. So let's take a look at some images. Okay.

Okay. Good. So here this is an angiogram.

This is the right coronary artery. I'm a patient.

This is normal. See? It's beautiful. You could see it's smooth.

Right? This is the dye all throughout the vessel. Before the injection, you don't see much of anything.

And then after the injection, you see the outline of the vessel. And this is what it look like for this patient.

Now you can tell the different projections, but I don't think you have to just stretch of the imagination to say that this is different than this.

You see all of this here? You could see. Let me just see if I can pause this at the right spot.

I goes in through here. You don't see any dye here? Very little.

Very little here. You don't see any dye because it's stuffed. Taking the place of the dye.

There's something there. Right. That's not radio.

Opaque blockage and a little trickle of stuff here.

Long blockage here. And you see more of the dye down here.

And there's even a little bit of blockage down here. So this is a stenosis significance to gnosis in the right coronary artery.

Now they had their left circulation. So here.

So that was the right coronary artery. And I'm just showing a shot here of a normal left circulation.

Left main. Yeah, this is the left circumflex.

Believe it or not, this is a branch of the left circumflex and this is the left anterior descending.

This, this is how it looks like in this particular projection. And let's see what it looks like for this patient.

Anybody see anything abnormal? Anybody.

So I want you to show me. I want you to show me where the was that you call.

Show me where the blockages. Yes.

No. Not yet. Yeah. Right there. So. But see that? You see that?

Thank you. But that's the. That's the left anterior descending.

Yeah, yeah. This is, uh, in the cath lab.

This is the background from the fluoroscopy. Yeah. So let me just use a bit more.

Okay. Uh. The overlaid. Now, you kind of see it's challenging because of some vessels overlaid here.

But do you see this tight, this, this little trickle here?

Because there's a big blockage. In the left anterior descending.

Then, did you? That was it. Yeah. Oh. You okay? I thought it was challenging.

Yeah, yeah. Charles. Just like this. Can you see the dome?

Yes. You can. Yeah. So by dominance, you mean where the.

The posterior descending artery comes off of.

Right. So we'll talk about this at length. So the, um, there is a vessel that supplies the inferior wall.

And I understand why you ask this. Because at heart block you. Is that what you're asking?

No. Okay. Okay. Yeah. There's a there's a vessel that supplies the inferior wall of the left ventricle.

It's called the posterior descending artery that comes off of the right corner artery.

And, um, in, um, 80% of patients, uh, this patient was right dominant.

Uh, so there's a big blockage here. So what can we do about this?

Now. And so this. Is, uh, uh, fixing the vessel.

So before. So before. Before.

Do you see this? This wire. Here and this wire here.

So this is a wire going down the left anterior descending.

This is going down. The circumflex is another view. So it's twisted.

So it's not analogous to the last one. So from this in this wire you could thread over a balloon.

Make sure this balloon, it's deflated, stretches across the blockage.

Blow up the balloon and open up the blockage. It's an angioplasty.

And then you can put a stent there to help keep it open. And that's what happened in this.

So that's the start of the case and that's the end of the case.

You see how it's opened up because after it was, uh, angioplasty and.

All right? Yes, Jackie? Yes.

There are self expanding states. Yeah.

The, um, the the issue is with stents is they are patency and their success rate is, is a is a strong function of whether it's fully open.

It has to be well opposed to the vessel wall. Does that make sense.

And so you typically want to high pressure inflation.

So even if it were self expanding which there are steps like that you want to go in with another balloon

afterwards blow it up under high pressure to really push that stent into the into the wall of the vessel.

So does that make sense? So most of the states that are used for coronary intervention are not self self expanding,

that are stents that are used in other places in the body, like the peripheral vasculature that are.

Okay. So. So this patient had an led us to gnosis that was fixed.

They had to have bad RCA disease. Um, but that was not fixed.

Uh. Sorry. I don't know how to do these lights. So they had, um.

Bad RCA disease that wasn't fixed,

but it was believed that the left anterior descending blockage was the one that was really responsible for this presentation.

So doing well, but the post procedure course was followed by reperfusion ventricular tachycardia.

So this is all true. This is all real.

So after opening the vessel, you think you're done. Do you think you're fixed?

But then you have this area of the myocardium that was, um, had was oxygen deplete.

Yeah. Ischemic. And then you flood it with oxygen.

So what happens? I'm sorry.

Yeah. And what is that? What's the etiology of that? Um, I think a.

Yeah, right. It's got a lot of free radical formation. Right?

And that causes more damage. And can result in abnormal a rhythm arrhythmia, a rhythm genic state.

It's just trying to set a rhythm anyway. Yeah.

And, uh, leading in ventricular tachycardia. Resulting in ventricular tachycardia.

So then this patient was shocked. Into a sinus rhythm.

So this is different than the pads for just pacing. In this case you do defibrillation.

And um,

so the fibrillation is the mechanism in that way that works as you shock the heart and you get rid of all electrical impulses across the heart.

So you stop. So essentially you make somebody a systolic. Right.

And this gives the normal conduction system a chance to reset.

Yeah. So defibrillation. Get rid of the ventricular tachycardia.

Took it back to the cath lab. She had this individual had, um, instant thrombosis.

So the stent is metal. Metal likes to attract platelets.

There are things that we do to try to mitigate that, but it happens nonetheless. And had it restent it good.

Andrew. Graphic results. And then she was.

Then this individual was transferred to the coroner care unit afterwards to be, uh, for um.

Uh, to be monitored. So physical exam patient was intubated on a breathing machine, on a ventilator, but alert and oriented, following commands.

Blood pressure. Lot better. 110 over 53.

Heart rate 81. Normal. Sinus rhythm.

Normal. Heart block. O2 saturation 96% normal.

I'm not telling you what this is. I say it's normal, but she's into.

This person is intubated and so was getting some supplemental oxygen.

So 96 is normal, but we don't really know how much oxygen she's on. This person's probably still, um, hypoxic.

Lungs sounded good anteriorly.

You can't have this patient sit up there on a breathing machine right there laying back.

You can only do the exam in front. And we'll go through all of this. This will be part of the class as well.

The normal physical exam. For, uh, normal cardiovascular.

And we'll do some of the pulmonary exam as well. How many people are taking respiratory in addition to this?

Thanks. Heart exam.

Regular rhythm. Normal first and second heart sounds.

We'll go through this. No murmurs. This patient had jugular venous distension.

So what does that mean? Look at the neck veins. The internal jugular feeds directly into the right atrium.

There are no valves in the internal jugular vein.

So if the right atrial pressures are high, you can see that as distention of the internal jugular vein.

But it's a measure of the right atrial pressure. And it was high.

No carotid bruises. Listening to the carotid. No signs of blockages.

Their abdomen soft, tender, undescended from a vowel.

Sounds no swelling. This patient had an intra aortic balloon pump.

In place. So we had, um, some questions about mechanical devices that I used to support this patient.

Yeah. And so I want to talk a little bit just about actually.

What comes next. Sorry. Let's.

We'll come back to that incredible and plump in a minute. Going on with course on day two.

She developed an OTA requirement, so she needed much more oxygen to maintain her oxygen saturations above 90%.

Physical exams change. Now there are crackles in the lung basis and worsening jugular venous distention.

Right atrial pressures are going up. Before the lungs were clear.

Now the crackles. Yeah. What does that mean? Crackles?

Yes. A stuff that's in the lungs that shouldn't be there. Yeah.

Crackles typically in the setting means that there's fluid in the lungs.

So right atrial pressures are up. Fluid has developed in the lungs and that happens in patients that have poor pump function.

So if you're the, um, oxygenated blood from the lungs returns to the left atrium to the pulmonary veins.

Yeah. There are no valves in the pulmonary vein. So what happens when the left atrial pressure increases?

I'm sorry. Increase in possession of pulmonary veins.

Increase pressure in the pulmonary vasculature and you could get fluid.

From the high hydrostatic pressure in the pulmonary vasculature that goes out into the lung space.

We're going to go through all of this and get all of this in detail. Um, we're doing all of this quickly.

I don't expect the information transfer from this discussion to be high.

I'm just trying to give a sense of the type of things that we've got to, that we're going to cover and talk about in this class.

I don't expect you to absorb all of this now. But I want you to sort of understand how you can think about these things in a very simple way.

So the heart is a simple organ. Blood drains from the lungs into the left atrium.

Why would the crackles of the heart's not functioning? The pressures in the left side of the heart of going up?

I can, you know, take this argument backward. The lungs drain into the left side.

So there's a problem with the left sided pressure is going to be problem in the lungs. Yeah.

Right side of the heart pumps to the lungs. That's problems in the lungs and the pressures.

And it's got to affect the right side because that would have to pump against the higher pressure, right atrial pressure.

So you can reason very in a very cogent and logical way as to how an insult and

the left ventricle caused by ischemia is a manifests itself in all of this.

You don't need to memorize anything other than just the normal anatomy of the heart.

And you could reason through this entire case right ischemia, left ventricular dysfunction,

elevated left sided pressures, pulmonary vascular pressures go up.

The right side has to work harder. The right side pressures go up.

Right atrial pressure goes up. And you can do this all with very with no memorization.

Yeah. Aside from the simple anatomical things that we've already discussed.

It makes sense. Okay, so now a right heart catheterization was done to estimate the pressures and our cardiac output.

We from all of this, we're surmising that yes, the left side of pressures are elevated.

So I want to actually measure the left sided pressures in the heart.

And that's another procedure called a right heart catheterization where you're going to oh, I'm taking up too much time.

Yeah. Oh I do. I thought you okay?

Sounds good. All right, so here, this is, uh, mechanism where you put a catheter into the heart.

On the other end of the catheter is a pressure transducer.

And you can measure pressures in different chambers of the heart. Don't ask me about.

The catheter is made up. Right. So in the past.

When we were talking about the transvenous pacing, we went in through the internal jugular.

We're going to do the same here. You're going through the internal jugular.

Spread this catheter down into the right atrium, right ventricle out into the pulmonary artery.

Yeah. So you could easily measure the right atrial pressures because I can put it in here.

Stop. Get a pressure reading. I can go to the right ventricle.

Stop. Get a pressure reading.

I can go into the pulmonary artery, stop at a pressure reading so I can get pressure readings at each of those, each of those regions.

Yeah. Okay, now, on the tip of this catheter.

Do you see that black dot? Yeah, that's a balloon.

Yeah. So this catheter gets thread out, the balloon is up,

and after a while it can't go any further because the size of the vessel is smaller than the diameter of the balloon.

Yeah, and I can make a pressure reading. Here.

So I can measure right atrium, right ventricle, pulmonary artery.

And I can I can also make a pressure reading at this point where this catheter is just gone as far as it can,

because the diameter I'm at a point with the diameter of the vessel is smaller.

What does that reading correspond to? Yeah.

Are you sure? Sure. Why?

Why that corresponds to left. Yeah. That's the name.

Yeah. Why does it correspond to the left atrium? Excellent.

That is correct. Excellent. So here this kind of depicts what was said.

What was said, what Charles just articulated. So here this catheter goes into the right atrium right ventricle.

And then when the balloon is is stopped here there's no flow distal to the distal to the catheter.

That can't be right because that's the whole purpose that balloon stops flow.

That makes sense. So there is no flow between the tip of the catheter.

This blood goes into the lungs and empties in the left atrium.

So I could draw a line from here to here in which there is no flow.

So the reading. When the catheter is in this position is an estimate of the left atrial pressure.

Does that make sense? Yes, sir. Yes.

So so this is so right. So this is true in most patients.

In most cases, there are scenarios where this is not true. If you have longstanding lung disease and pulmonary hypertension,

where the vessels in the in the lung are very, very small, this this this breaks down.

This might not be true, but in most patients I'm excluding that in a few other a few other scenarios.

This is a this is a reliable estimate of the left atrial. So it's not 100% correct because as you say, I haven't said anything about the lungs.

You can imagine if that all of this were blocked. So there was no communication between here and the lungs.

Yeah. That it wouldn't be a measure. Right.

So there's an assumption here that you have free flow in principle between the tip of the catheter and left atrium.

Does that make sense? So the point being that with this procedure, I can measure right sided pressures right here.

Right ventricle I can measure pressures in the pulmonary artery. But I can also get an estimate of what's going on in the left side of the heart.

One of the things I'm hoping and I've, I've been very, you know, and this is, uh,

typified by some of the questions that I'm getting is a mix of individuals here.

And I hope that some of the technologies that we talk about throughout this class

will spur ideas for people to think differently and to think about unmet needs.

That's the HST ethos. Yeah.

Now, while you laughed, laughed what?

I said, okay. Well, it was said with all sincerity, but but yes, yes, I get it right.

So. Yes, sorry I was. Yes.

Right? Yes. Yes. Would. So.

So what interferes with this is actually the vessels themselves.

If the vessels are normal, it's a reliable measure. You need disease in the vessels.

So if you have if you have pulmonary hypertension where the vessels are abnormal.

And those vessels are very small or very high resistance, then this may break down.

But as long as the vessels are okay, it's still good.

So it's not the lung itself, it's the vasculature that determines whether this is a reliable measure or not.

Does that make sense? All right.

And, um. Yes. So let's see. And let's just take this in a normal state.

So this is a normal person. Catheter goes into the right atrium.

And this is what the pressure tracing looks like. We'll talk about this. It has a very distinctive shape as a wave.

Wave. We'll discuss all of that. But this is what the pressures typically are.

Mean pressure in the right atrium. It's typically about five millimeters of mercury.

Then in the right ventricle, the pressure profile is very different.

Yeah. Valve is closed. Pressure increases much more.

And what it is here mean the RV pressure. I'm sorry. It's typically 25 over five millimeters of mercury.

Don't please don't talk about a mean, um, right ventricular pressure.

Pulmonary arterial pressure. It's typically 25 over ten with a mean of 15.

And by mean, I mean you, you know, you have to integrate over this for one beat, right?

Take its average. That's the definition of a mean of a. Of a of a function.

And then in the wedge position. This is a typical tracing of what it looks like.

And the mean. Right atrial pressure is typically between 5 and 15mm of mercury.

Okay. I have some other values for that and we'll just skip over this.

So in this patient these were the numbers.

The right atrial pressure was ten millimeters of mercury. Right ventricle pressure is 45 over 80.

PA was 45 over 30. Very, very high.

And the mean wedge. Left age of pressure was 28mm of mercury.

Cardiac index is 1.8l per minute.

This is a measure of the cardiac output, which you can also get from this catheter.

And it's just too involved to get into it. Um, this but this is something that.

Professor will opine about later on.

So in addition to the pressures, you could get an estimate of the cardiac output, the liters per minute that the blood produces to supply to the body.

Yeah. And, um. No.

And normally it's. It's normalized by the body surface area.

That's where this meter square comes. Normal cardiac index.

Again, liters per minute divided by the body surface area is about 2.8 above 2.8l per minute per meter square.

So this is low. Heart function is impaired, not producing enough blood.

Way below the normal state. Left atrial pressures are high and all of the preceding pressures are elevated as well.

So the, uh, right hard categorization revealed evidence of severe.

A serious impairment of our heart as a pump. And impella was placed to provide mechanical assistance to the left ventricle.

Kate, who was who asked me about this was Kate.

Were you? No, no, it was Eric. Somebody asked me about some mechanicals.

Yeah, it was you, right? Oh, I'm so sorry.

I've been calling you Kate, all of this time. I know, I know it's Catherine.

I know, I thought I thought you'd like to be called Kate. Apologies. I am so sorry.

I will not do it again. Um. So, um, my wife spells her name the same way that you do.

And she likes to be called Kate. So that's what I think, that that is what I think.

That is the thing that was in my mind. So apologies. Um, I just want to show you it's not intentional.

So? So an impella was placed to provide mechanical assistance to her.

Left to her left ventricle. Um, and an IV drug was started to increase her blood pressure.

So. And Impella is one of these mechanical devices.

That actually, um, pumps for the left ventricle.

Yeah. And how does it work? So pump function is impaired because a pump functions and the pressures are high.

Yeah. How can you impair. How can you improve the cardiac output?

So this is a device typically goes into the groin back up into the aorta and it goes into the left ventricle.

And there's an axial pump here. So it literally just sucks up blood from the left ventricle and supplies it to the aorta.

Yeah. So it just sits there, goes across the LRT valve.

Yep. He has a pump motor.

An inlet area. This is a pigtail catheter. That's. Sure.

This pigtail catheter is gone and the pump is here.

And it just sucks up blood and puts it into the aorta. So it sort of takes care of the pumping action.

Action of the heart. There are other devices that can help with, uh, left ventricular function.

And the other one was an energetic balloon popped the impellers relatively new.

The balloon pump has been around for much, much longer.

So in an inter aortic balloon pump. You go in again through the green.

This. You don't do the radial, not the goes in. Typically, the femoral artery goes up to the heart.

And it ends right at the aortic arch.

And how does it work? Whereas the impella actually sucks blood out of the, um, left ventricle and pumps it into the aorta.

This device. Has two different states and systole when the heart is pumping.

There's a balloon here that's deflated, so the aorta is unimpeded.

Flow can go there in diastole. When the heart is resting, it inflates and excludes blood.

So with each beat deflates, inflates, deflates, inflates.

Yeah. When it is in diastole and it's inflated.

Yep. And then the heart starting to pump. It suddenly contracts.

So you create a vacuum. And so it essentially sucks blood out of the left ventricle.

So the other one actually is a pump that goes into the left ventricle and pumps blood out.

This sucks blood out of the left ventricle by rapidly, um, collapsing when the heart starts to beat.

Make sense? Moreover. In diastole.

When this balloon is fully inflated, the pressure in this ascending order is higher, right?

And the vessels that feed the heart come off of the ascending aorta, so it improves blood flow to the to the heart in diastole.

And it relieves the heart, makes it easier to pump incessantly by deflating.

So you can we can take a look at the pressure tracings with a now with when the balloon pump is on and off.

But I think the central point is here. We're running out of time. So I just want to make sure.

So on day three, blood pressures stabilized, volume status improved.

He got the impella device removed. On day four, she developed diaphragm eases recurrent severe chest pain again and had this electrocardiogram.

So he had an initial cath stent thrombosis and now has this.

Now let's not a few things about this electrocardiogram.

See, the amplitude here is very different. Whereas before it was very negative.

Yeah. You can see the amplitude is less. And one of the reasons the amplitude is less is that you have less myocardium.

Right. What you see here, though.

You see these things? You see how this is straight?

This is a P wave. So let's first do this.

So the rhythm is fine. P QRS, p qrs speakers.

There's a P wave before everyone no longer heart block. But this.

These are St elevations and they're called. This is a widowmaker sign.

Why is it called widowmaker? Well.

Yes. Yeah. Well, this. Yeah, it's it's called Widowmaker. Right.

Because, you know, these signs were developed in a day by that was dominated by men.

Yeah. And so, you know what, what's really important, what happens to men when this.

Yeah. Portable wife is at home and now we're done.

Yeah. So we call it a widowmaker, which has, you know, parenthetically, some.

I'm not going to make, you know, jokes here is has a sexist, has a sexist connotations.

But you will. But the reason why I bring this up is because this is how we still refer to it.

Call this a widowmaker in a sense, but the intonation is that really it's about, uh, forming, um, that these patients have a high risk of dying.

That's that's the that's the statement. We'll talk about the pathophysiology of this.

This is sort of like a pattern recognition when you see this. It is madness.

Requires cath lab urgently. This patient went back to the cath lab.

Um, and but, uh, I just wanted to say a couple of things here, and I'm just going to end it after this.

There are some lab values in this setting. The thing that I want to point out is this troponin T and the c k.

In the setting of myocardial ischemia, we have blood markers that we measure.

These blood markers become elevated in the setting of when the heart is not getting enough blood and is damage to the myocardium.

Um, and, uh, troponin is a myocardial associated protein.

Very important for the contractile apparatus of the myocardium.

And it's leaked and it's very high, becomes elevated very early, which confirms the fact that this person is having acute myocardial infarction.

So returned to the stat cath lab had instant thrombosis again.

And um, had PCI, he had a percutaneous intervention, had another stent placed.

This patient had some, uh, actually turns out had some hyper coagulant underlying state that made them prone.

To understand thrombosis. Last thing I want to show.

Is this patient had a cardiac ultrasound.

To look at their heart function. This is another technology that we'll talk about in the class.

Just want to give you a sense of the different technologies that we will. That we will talk about.

This is a normal state. Normal heart.

Cross section. This is the left atrium. Left ventricle.

Mitral valve. And this is the aortic valve.

You can kind of see it. Blood goes this way out here and this is the right ventricle.

And if you take a look at this patient's heart. You get a sense that the heart function is really not contracting as well.

So it's very depressed. Left ventricular systolic function.

Okay, I'm going to just end here. I did not mean to take this long with the.

But I hope, um. So she was started on therapy for heart failure.

And heart failure is a section of this class that we will talk about the etiology of the heart failure in this instance.

Was a massive myocardial infarction reinfection, which required several trips to the cath lab.

But overall, this patient was discharged in a stable state.

Okay. So I'm going to end it here. Um, we will revisit this case at the end of the class.

And we all sort of go into some of these concepts because I think we'll have a had a chance to go through each of them in detail.

So that's all. Any questions? Okay.

See you next time. Huh?

Huh? Sure about.

