[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Beating heart beats. So 60, right?

Heart rate is 60 beats per minute. Right. So that was so we've got the rate.

So it's 60. Is that normal or absolutely normal.

That's pretty acceptable. Um so so that's the rate.

What would you say if a rhythm is so to identify the rhythm we have to look for p waves and q races.

And we ask ourselves are is there one p wave for every q, r, s.

Does that look like it's and is there are pretty normal relationship between the P waves and the QRS.

I think it looks like, you know, they look pretty normal.

So what do we see? We. Where do we look for p waves? Typically we look at two here and we see what we can see a p wave with that looks like that.

There's the p way there's the across. And then we see the p wave and there's the q r s.

And so the other thing we talked about is that the two three and AVF are the inferior leads.

And so they give you a view of the lower part of the heart. And the sinus node is way up high.

So when you have activation from the sinus node that's heading toward the inferior leaves, it inscribes positive p waves into three and AVF.

So that's all consistent with sinus node activity.

So it looks like normal sinus rhythm at 60 beats per minute.

Now, what do you think of the access? Yeah.

Could I ask a question? Sure, sure. Yeah. Two, three and AVF.

Those are like the lateral leads, right? These are the inferiors in these two three and AVF are the inferior leads.

That's positive because it's positive. So like if you imagine you have an electrode down here and you have a site of activation

of your electrode up high where the sinus notice it's heading towards those leads.

So that makes it positive. It was near those leads and heading away.

It would make a negative uh deflection. So that's why that's why you think that way.

It's basically the p-wave axis. But we don't like calculate usually the whole p-wave axis of activation for like normal EKG meaning.

The other thing we talked about was like looking for evidence of atrial enlargement, which we don't really see here right now.

So we've been looking for that, um, sign in link to like this or other negative deflections on those would be clearer.

Used to like left compartment. If this was a very tall skinny p wave it would suggest a p pulmonary.

But we don't see that right. Um but let's talk about our ventricular axis here.

Like. So someone to say right works.

Yeah. Yeah. So it looks right words which is a little funny.

So why do we say that it's in right words. If we look at least one interval we see that they are negative.

Right. And what does that tell us. If we look at this little pill here you see that lead one points straight off to the left shoulder.

Like all of these pictures are as if you're looking at the patient. So when it goes that way means it's going to slide left right.

And so if I see that the main axis of activation is opposite to that right, it means that my axis falls in the opposite half from here.

So like if we look at the line perpendicular to the one axis would fall in here.

Now this is a little bit of a trick question because this is not very nice.

To give this to us is the first one. This is a healthy young kind of asymptomatic 18 year old.

So what's our pretest probability that this guy has significant right access to patients pretty low right.

We don't think really there's anything wrong with this guy. And when you get a medical test that suggests something's wrong,

when you don't see anything wrong with the patients, you should worry that there's something wrong with the test.

So that's what this is about. So in order to get you what has to happen, I have to have my medical assistant come,

and they have to put all those electrodes on the patient and they have to not make mistakes.

There are a lot of electrodes. It's very easy to make at least one mistake.

And one of the most common mistakes that the medical assistance make.

And I don't know why it's this way, but it's very common that the right and the left arm are switched.

And what is our clue on this? Because you see that the right and the left arm are switched.

It should clue you into that case is good for you.

With it, it's negative in week one. Where is the sinus node?

It's way over here. It's as far to the right side of the heart is.

It can be the p wave. If it's at being activated the normal way should be positive.

It should be heading towards the one electrode.

So if you have normal sinus rhythm you should have positive P waves in one.

Pretty much positive leads in AVL. That can be a little bit different in some people, but definitely positive.

There is only one condition where it's not the case and it's still sinus rhythm, and that's people whose heart is on the wrong side of their chest.

So that's called contextual. All right. So the question you ask yourself is is this truly right axis deviation.

And the patient's heart is on the wrong side of their chest. Or is it a lead error.

So just by probabilities, the likelihood that it's a lead error is much much higher.

The heart is on the wrong side of the chest. But you can actually have this.

So if you take a look at the pre cordial progression do you remember we talked about that how you basically start mostly negative in V1.

He's got a little R wave here which I would encourage you to ignore because of young people.

Can have a little r wave there. And this guy that's a little different from the way we talked about it.

But that's that's okay. But he's mainly negative here.

And then we throw our wave and he's got a full R with 56.

In order for that to happen the apex of the heart has to be here on the left side of the chest.

What happens if the heart is on the other side of the chest?

We see the R waves go down, down, down, down, down.

Because as you come over this way, you're getting further and further away from the heart, and it generates less and less and less voltage.

So we know from looking at this EKG that the guy's heart is on the right side, the correct side of the chest,

which is the left side of the chest, and that the medical assistant made a mistake and swapped the right arm and left arm.

So we know it's on the right side because the.

Are showing an increase in the right. We notice on the correct side I should say not the right side of the correct side.

It's on the left side, but it's on the correct side. Yeah. So that's why we know that it's not Dexter Cardia.

Right. So this is probably when when I get handed an EKG in the clinic, the very first thing I do is I go and look at lead one,

and then I hand it back to my ma and say,

please do it again because we need to get the leads correct me so that I can interpret the recipe book review.

I look at the p wave and I look at the directionality of the axis,

and if the p waves are upside down and one and APL and everything else looks pretty much normal,

I ask them to go home terrified that the beats are correct.

So this is a right arm. Left arm, please. Maybe.

Silly question of please. Yeah, it's hard to tell.

Like I first looking at this. Looked at the little. Blimp after the upside down period, thought that was the place of which the only one.

You looked at one thing just like that's the plane for that.

Is that you like? Yeah. After that I was like, oh, the p-wave because it's just the, you know.

No, I guess between the two. Yeah.

I mean, like I was like, oh, it's a, it looks like the little bunny ears.

Um. Oh the bunny. So the bunny ears. All these for the shoes.

First of all, I'm so. I'm not sure. That's a little surprising to me.

Let's take a look just for a second at that little cheat sheet that, um, I gave you guys.

Looking at the the PWA and the IRS coming to us, right?

Yeah. So one of the key ways that's atrial contraction, right.

So atrial contraction is happened during the period. And then there's usually like a little bit of an isoelectric segment.

The younger you are the faster you're able notice the shorter the that's going to be.

This is usually that little time. Really. Nothing happens when that's when the heat is happening.

And then the q r s it's all happening after that.

So when we talk about the quantity, we're talking about the R s on a prime system, talking about a person that works for Q, R and R and S.

And then they have another question after that. So it follows that q r s.

If we can see for um I think I my terminology was I think I read that isoelectric segment, it looks like that Q it was not.

No, I guess was right. Can you point on my laptop.

Yeah. What you're talking about or even if you. Yeah, point on your paper to what you're talking about like this right here.

Maybe that's just me. Yeah. So but what I would encourage you to do when you're trying to decide what's up and where it go.

So the very first thing that happens is usually the p wave.

For most rhythms it might be a q r, s.

But the the thing that tells you where the baseline is.

So what did you think the first attempt was like?

What if you thought that this was the case here?

Then what did you think all of this was? Before that?

I guess there was a chance like noise or. But I guess I see that that is the isoelectric is isoelectric with the same as before.

Yes. That's what I would what I would encourage you to do is the t p segment, which is what I'm indicating with my pulse right now is the zero line.

And there are a lot of times when people are wiggling around. So that line may be interesting.

So that can make it hard. But the best for you to do to try to figure out what's going upwards and what's going

downwards is to kind of just I the reason I laughed about the calipers is in real life,

we use a lot of papers and pens up to the other paper.

So if you put a little line for yourself at the TP segment,

and then you'll clearly see that the first sort of event that happens and it happens on every beat too,

like if you're trying to decide what to raise or not, it should be something that what you're looking at should happen pretty much on every beat.

That's the best way to try to figure out if it's a noise thing or if it is if there's very little noise that on an EKG anyway,

that should cluster around the passages.

So if you're seeing some type of bump that clusters around the heart beats, then it's probably a cardiac event of some kind.

Um, there are a few exceptions to that,

but so then if you're coming along your TP segment and you look for the first box that you see, I say, oh, I think that that's it.

And so then what can you do to verify? In order to verify, you can then go straight down because all these leads are simultaneous in time.

You know, as you go forward you don't see safety one anymore.

Like when it switches from lead one to AVR, you get different information, but the time is still going along like this, right?

So if you take this little bump and say, hey, I think it's the p wave, it starts right after this heavy line on that EKG.

And I go down and I say, oh, I see another bump that also looks like a P.

And I go down here and I'm like, oh, that looks even more like then you sort of feel like,

yeah, I think I have enough independent verification that that's the case, right?

Thanks. That's the rates according to rates is sometimes is around 60 and like a pretty good pretty standard is just like around 75.

Yes, yes. Especially if you go up.

One of my colleagues likes to call it your eye calipers. If you look at this, the rhythm strip,

which this is lead to going all the way across your I calipers tell you about measuring each one, that it's a bit faster over here.

It's a bit slower over here. Right. That's what you're pointing out to know what that is.

Screaming. It's called respiratory sinus arrhythmia.

Right? It's, uh. Yeah, I did my undergraduate thesis as it is.

It's. So when you leave, you know, you change your excursion.

You. So you guys. Yeah. We did, uh, did you do it in the lab? Yes, I did in the lab where you tried to figure it out.

Okay. Yeah, sure.

We're looking at lead one. And the other reason why it's like, specifically the team interested in.

Because I guess in this species, we at least have a limited.

Yeah. So the T wave is a little tricky because the T wave is the recovery of the heart.

So these are both both the P wave and the QRS are depolarization events.

And the T wave is a representation event in the ventricle.

So the absence of the activation of the p polarization is kind of reactive to whatever happened when it was depolarized.

So if it was depolarized in an abnormal way, you might see an abnormal T wave afterwards.

So trying to look at it to decide if the heart t activated, if that makes sense,

because we're trying to figure out looking at this, does the EKG show normal cardiac activation?

That's what we're kind of trying to say. And the very first event is the p wave.

We've noticed already. You know, we're going along doing our normal stuff.

We were noticing that the axis was unusually rightward for a healthy young man.

Right. And so we're like then we're like, okay, we're going to go back and check.

So with that, we figured out the axis from looking at the shrouds.

So what else do we have to do. Polarization events.

We have the P with which is a deep water sation event.

Right. And so that we can take a look and we're like, oh, that looks like right over here when we don't think that it's way over here.

So it must be that first. Does that make sense?

Yeah. So I'm just going to move ahead.

Unless anybody has any other questions about this. We don't see any.

You don't see atrial or ventricular hypertrophy somewhere with atrial hypertrophy.

We looked at the targets two and V one.

And so for right atrial we'd be looking at a tall p-wave that's more than two and a half times as tall.

Um as for left atrial, we'd be looking for a wide p wave that has that kind of m notch.

That's two and a half boxes wide. And so both those are not really seen here.

And then we also can look at so a normal atrial has up going and down going components to the p wave that kind of match each other.

Um when it's right atrial enlargement the up going part will get bigger.

And when it's left atrial enlargement the bottom part will get bigger.

But this looks pretty equal. In fact, it's so equal you don't see it remains in one spot at a time.

Like sometimes it's kind of missing. But here you can at least see that it's not going down in V1.

And then if we were going to look for ventricular hypertrophy, there are some places that we would look.

So we would look at the as wave V2 and combine it with the R wave and V5 and see if they add up to being greater than 35mm.

And that would be something that might suggest ventricular hypertrophy.

So he was about five times maybe 12 right.

And here we've got five 1015. So it doesn't quite make greater than 35.

Um and if we fix the leads AVL would also be less than uh.

Young tall people can sometimes also meet the criteria for ventricular hypertrophy.

Um, and so it doesn't correspond to 1 to 1 exactly with echocardiographic findings that are associated.

Okay. So we'll move on to the next one. What we see is that this is a 26 million prior.

Compulsive medication. Right. Do you know what that means?

I'm sorry. That's awesome.

You said ask the question. Which one of you five is in in lecture three.

You said to one in May, 5 or 6. Whatever he's looking for.

Exactly. It's usually v2 or it's V2 of the two.

And as we found to be six. That's what the left ventricle for.

That's for left ventricle. And you can also look for other things that would go with it.

You often have a left axis deviation. We definitely don't have a left access to the ocean here.

The other thing that goes with left ventricular hypertrophy is we sometimes see something called translation changes.

So the areas that are the most hypertrophy have two wave inversions and funny looking S2 segments.

And you don't see that here either. So it's uh, it's there's not a lot going for for a ventricular answer that don't write hypertrophy.

Well. So it's until they fix the loops and everything. It's a little hard to tell but probably not.

Yeah, yeah. So this is just have to look at this is this person is rolling in on into an anticonvulsant right.

So what does that. So there's um people with epilepsy, they'll sometimes have experimental drugs and they'll bring people in,

you know, for a therapeutic trial of a medication. And then some of them can for one acute interval.

That's probably the reason that people do this kind of thing.

And so they're doing a screening test for that.

So I would say this is another person that probably doesn't have that much pretest probability for having effect.

So what do you think? Do I try? Yes.

Um so the rates.

Honestly. I'm like 66.

Yeah. I lost the rhythm.

Um, I can see, um. Uh to are it's very, uh, also like it's not for.

So, uh, what's inside as well. Yeah. It looks like normal sinus rhythm.

That's right. And you think that P waves now they were more happy.

They should have probably done. This is the first one. And the other one is the second one.

Just to clarify. So you don't start with like crazy ones.

Start like that. So you can see here have the main axis of excess.

And the one is positive and the feeling is positive and the same is true.

And what do you think of the axis here? So I use like a v, f and two.

And if they're both positively just normal. Yes that's true.

That's true. And if we want it to be a little bit more precise, the closest thing we have here to an ISO electric lead is about.

So where is AGL. So we know the axis is either it's perpendicular pretty much to this one.

And it's either going this way and going this way around to just to yeah.

So like positive 60. Yeah. So that's that's great.

So that tells you it's normal right. And then what do you think for the rest of it.

So uh normal sinus rhythm. Well that's so yeah.

Interval seems to be nice and small like than and so it's a little bit on the short side.

But I'll tell you that this is another very young person. It's probably for less.

Yeah. So it's around one um, you know it's around 80 to 100, but yeah.

Yeah, it's sort of at the upper end of that. So every tiny box is 40 milliseconds.

So this is probably like maybe about four boxes are.

Yeah. Um, and then the other thing is Chris Columbus also.

That's very small. Yeah.

But it's two. So around like 80.

Yeah. Thank you to interval. So?

It looks like it's less than two big boxes, right?

Okay. Yeah. You say so. Like, in some ways, thinking about each of the big boxes is 200 milliseconds.

So if it's less than two big boxes, it's less than four seconds, right?

Yes. So. So it's pretty nice and short. Yeah.

Um, so do we then look at hypertrophy?

Sure. We can look at our projection. Yes. Uh, uh, to what do you want to do?

The atrium. It's atrial enlargement. Technically, not hypertrophy, but let's do the atria first.

Yeah. So that one. So it is like it is in like a around like 120 up.

Uh, so up two and a half box. So I would say this is up going, but it's not two and a half boxes.

So I would say it doesn't meet criteria for right atrial enlargement.

Yeah. And then V v was yeah.

V1I think it's still balanced. If you draw that line at the two piece segment I think it's still up and down going.

So there's like five cases like that. Yeah. Correct.

Correct. So I'm done with the ride tournament.

Uh, yeah. Yeah. So I usually start with the left person.

Yeah. So we, um, need to get the five most comfortable.

With that, like five, ten, 20, 25, 30.

So probably not. Doesn't meet criteria.

And then the other one that goes with it for left ventricular hypertrophy is that our wave interval greater than 11,000m, which it does not have.

And also the left axis deviation and it does not have.

So probably left to check clarify for two things. And same thing for our right ventricular hypertrophy.

There's no right axis deviation. So it's very hard to call right ventricular.

Okay. So you ended up with the right ventricle. But there's always that right.

Pretty much always unless the left ventricle is very very abnormal.

So there are certain circumstances when both ventricles are high purchases.

And that kind of gets messed up. Sorry. Is that a question?

Um, yeah. This would be stupid. Oh. How do you get the, uh, the amplitude again?

Oh, for the so the the downplaying part of V2 cluster of blame part 25 or V6, whichever is bigger.

And if it's greater than 35mm and suggest that there might be left ventricular lack of millimeters defined by on the EKG, it's millimeter.

It's voltage basically. So in that when when we talk.

So this is like ten millimeters of voltage,

this square wave at the beginning it tells us a little bit about what the um it's just the millivolts resistance.

Yeah. So very normal.

Yes. Very normal. So you would tell him it's okay for him to get his seizure medication?

Yes. So what was the criteria for the voltage?

Oh, the voltage is just to look for help when you're looking for hypertrophy.

Yeah, I mean that. Sorry. Oh, yeah. So the down going part of the two plus the up going part of D5 or V6, whichever is bigger.

If it's greater than 35 then it's that's one of the criteria.

And then you look for some corroborating features. Usually then you have a left axis deviation, uh, which we don't have in this case.

And the other thing you can sometimes see is that the ah, wave in the middle is also a bit complex or greater.

That's another. So. What is that.

Oh, sorry. I was just gonna say that's for right ventricular hydrogen. No, those are all left.

Left ventricular. Oh, yeah. The right ventricular hypertrophy.

The criteria are right axis deviation. And that you have an ROA for V1 much earlier than you'd expect that.

Sorry. This is going back to my last question I asked. Yeah, Google carries on this.

So by the logic that we're just saying we need to refund users, this would be 335.

It's close to that. Right. And so you look for other features to verify because a tall skinny young person you can meet those criteria.

So we look for other evidence that there might be ventricular hypertrophy.

And we look for the things that go with it. And we don't see any of those features.

So we think it probably it's something that if you were reading pages you could see possible, uh,

possibly voltage criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy but also possible normal variants.

And follow our question. Yeah. Um, this is pretty much the exact same question I asked before, but I just want to double clarify.

So on the legislation on this sheet it says B1 and then b5, b6.

But right now we're talking about going to be 96. Why does it say that.

So I just wanted to confirm which one we should be using. Because if he's B1 then oh yeah that's that's incorrect.

That's why you're saying he want huh. Yeah. Oh yeah. No that's correct.

Yeah. Yeah. We don't we don't want to just.

Yeah actually. Just pull the trigger.

Yeah. Because we see one does not usually have enough sansome.

So it. Should be B2 and it should say B2.

Yeah. So just.

Because it just looks amazing.

Okay. Who wants to do number three. What is going down.

Um, so. This.

So we need the rate. And we get slow is an acceptable answer.

Yeah. I guess it's like 1234, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, 11.

Big box. And so I don't know what that is. Yeah.

So if, if, if, if it were ten it would be pack of 60 which would be 30.

No no it's in the 20. I understand it was like just 10s.

Um. But it's required.

And then that's the rate. The rate is, is great of cardiac, but we don't know what rate of cardio I guess.

Okay. And then for the rhythm.

So like I don't think I see the key rate here. Yeah I don't see if there any there.

Okay. So that's not sinus rhythm. No I'm okay.

Um. And is it regular or irregular?

I mean, the curious and it's elusive.

Yeah, it looks like they're pretty regular. So whatever it's happening is happening.

It's happening pretty regularly. Yeah. And then it's the curious.

Is it narrow or is it wide? Really?

It's like normal. Normal? Yeah.

It's just like raised twice, for example. Yeah.

It is, it's it's. Yeah. Could be, could be taller in places.

But it's not, not horrible looking like in terms of the duration. It looks like it.

All right. Yeah. So no p wave activity that we can see at all right.

And create a cardio that's narrow. Like if you had to think about where in the heart.

So if we, we if we postulate that the sinus node is gone on vacation, it's not doing anything for this patient.

And the rhythm that we're seeing here is some kind of escape rhythm from the ventricle.

Right. It's just whatever backup pacemaker is there in the heart that's keeping the patient from not being dead.

Where do we think this is coming out of? It looks really close to normal activities.

Yeah, or just south of the A.v node. So usually the AV node itself doesn't have that much pacemaker activity,

but there's that little beginning part of the conduction system we call that junction.

So this is what we call junctional rhythm.

So when your escape rhythm is like just as that at that bottom part of the a.v node, the escape with is both bundle branches and everything.

And it should sort of resemble what normal conduction might look like if it instead came from one of the muscle cells.

Yes, you're wider curious what you would and you could actually even so, the places it could come from,

it can come from the Ave junction, little parts of the bundle branches on either side.

And then it can also come from the myocardial tissue.

That's like outside of the, um, the natural conduction system in order.

Those are least concerning to most concerning like this person, even though they're really slow, I'm not worried that they're going to die.

So set up for a pacemaker implant.

But somebody who has a really, like bizarre chamber escape that's coming from the myocardium, I worry that this might stop.

Like, I might even put a temporary pacemaker before I leave them.

So while I'm setting them up to get a permanent pacemaker, um, because each of them, in terms of reliability,

the farther down is reliable, and if it came from one of their devices, it would also be wider, would be wider,

but it would look a little bit like those those shapes that you talked about would come up bundle,

branch block with the, you know, the down going component in C one and the combined atomic arm way would be six.

It would look like that, or it would look like the bunny ears and still relatively narrow in the lateral leads.

Remember we talked about how thin right bundle branch block the D five and V6 look.

Kind of normal activation because the left ventricle is normally activated.

So it looks kind of like that depending on where it's coming out.

Right. Yeah. Yeah.

So this person has sinus arrest. It's because there's no evidence of any feelings anywhere right.

We can't I guess 100% exclude that they're not read retrograde P wave Sydney QRS.

But the QRS is are really narrow and we don't see any evidence of pinky out upside down after the QRS complex.

Right. Is that possible if there's like no backflow of the electrical activity because yes.

So there are people whose who's older people,

their sinus node can just quit or they're given a medication to slow their heart rate down in their sinus.

No, just quits working.

Um, but the actually probably more common scenario is that the sinus node is really slow and you get VA conduction on each of the junctional beats,

and it's actually the VA conduction. So continues to suppress the sinus knows as it's firing.

So that continuously if you picked up if you took away whatever medications.

Yeah. So just to clarify conceptually yeah an escape is basically is like a compensatory mechanism.

Yeah. Or a backup system sort of. Yeah. It's like it's so if you.

So the normal heart is designed for the sinus node to be in charge, you know, and for the conduction to all go through the AV node.

But if that system is not working, uh, since there are these escape because all of the, um, the just Purkinje system in particular,

they have this capability, they have a similar calcium handling situation inside the cell so that they can act like a pacemaker.

So if they really need to, it's just that their pacemaker rate is much slower than what the normal heart rate really is.

So they don't usually engage that capability. So because it's like a backup mechanism that is.

Built in to like the normal human body.

If there were an accessory pathway that isn't normal and we see a rhythm because of that, that would not be called an escape rhythm.

Correct? Correct. Because that's not it. Yeah. That's right. That's just an aberrant conduction, um, that you would see,

but it doesn't it doesn't count as escape implies that something that's supposed to be happening isn't happening.

And this is happening as a result because it's like an option, that kind of thing.

Automated systems. Oh, this is a tricky one, as you can see.

Just like this the other day.

So this is number two. This is a 72 year old.

They don't get any other history. Okay.

It's a 73 year old woman. You got an EKG?

We started real quick. For the last example, we don't have to calculate like the axes and like, you know.

No, once it's coming out of some muscle. Yeah, it's not clinically.

It's usually once it's not coming through the natural pathways.

We are we sort of stop all that stuff. The things they get like a Facebook or something.

Yeah. So this person usually. So there are a couple situations in how this can arise though.

It's not always 100% that this is the person needs a pacemaker.

But if there's no provoking factors.

So like I've seen people who are on dialysis, we just had a few like a month ago on the clinical service and because of the snowstorm,

they missed their dialysis sessions, uh, session.

Their electrolytes became really abnormal and they had a little too much acid in

their blood because their dialysis was not clearing their tickets in advance.

Yes. Um, so, uh, and so she wound up with her electrolytes being abnormal, and it triggered this.

So that was just like she need dialysis. And so that.

And then there are other situations where people have a fax for them, like atrial fibrillation.

And they give a lot of medicine to make it not be fast.

And then they pop back to normal rhythm.

And it turns out the sinus, no, it doesn't work anymore because the medicines have kind of poisoned the sinus node.

So those people sometimes if you take the medicines away, you can avoid a pacemaker.

But if a person is sort of minding their business, has passes out, comes to the emergency room.

With this, they get a pacemaker. He's.

Okay. Who wants to try this one? Okay.

Okay. This is. It is rate. Ventricular rate is about 70.

Um, it looks regular. Um, I do see waves before.

Be curious. I mean, maybe more curious, actually.

Do you think there are more PBS initiatives? Yeah. I couldn't really tell if it's also accessible, but anyway.

So access taxis. Um. Lovely view.

Yeah, a little bit. I would say it's like less access. Maybe not all the way to left access.

So like 66,000 and I don't see left ventricular pressure.

Finishing or control of the atrium is very hard.

So we have we're going to have to go back and look at the atria a little bit more closely.

See peachy is on all of them. Okay. Wait. Yeah.

Yeah. It looks like there's like sort of waves. It does look like a sawtooth.

So let's look down here at where it's lead to all the way across, because it's very helpful to look and see.

Now I totally see what you're talking about that like over here it looks like there might be a sawtooth.

It looks like there are extra bumps. Right. But are there places where it doesn't really look like there are extra bumps, like here in 3D?

It's very strange. Right? So when that happens, I find it very helpful to look at all the leads,

because if you can find one lead where the atrial activation is clear and it tells you the truth, um, so take a look at v2.

If I only showed you two, what would I say?

Then what would you say the rhythm is? Silence.

So that is the truth. Uh, so what's going on in the other leagues?

This is a lady with Parkinson's disease. I should have they should say that.

Did she say she's on cinnamon or Parkinson's or something like that?

And what do they have with Parkinson's disease? They get a particular tremor.

It's called a rolling tremor. So they usually have some axial motion, but they have this rolling tremor and it's very regular.

You know, so you get noise that's transmitted to the EKG.

That's up the cycle length of their tremor, you know, and it's not perfect.

So you'll usually see some times when it's not there and sometimes when it is there.

But it can look a lot like atrial flutter.

The only thing about it is I will say when you look at it, it doesn't look perfect, it looks kind and kind of noisy.

And the other thing is that like when you look at the baseline here, there's a bit of baseline movement.

And this is the classic patient group where, you know,

my my medical assistant will hand me the EKG and I'm like, you get one with less and less baseline.

You know, I tried five times. I couldn't get it without the baseline wandering.

And it's just because the patient is not still at any point, they're not still.

And so you have to make sure you don't end up calling something like this atrial flutter.

So this is a classic artifact on an EKG that's simulating atrial flutter in a lot of different leads.

But if you can find a lead like number two here we see a p wave.

You really see across. And you don't see any of that stuff in here.

V1 and V2 are great because they don't move that much.

The stern of your chest when you have tremor.

Maybe you breathe a lot, just a little bit. But when you have tremor, V1 and V2 are relatively still.

But the arm leads and stuff like that, they show that they show the tremor a lot.

So it's it's actually maybe down maybe in the arm of the target.

So that's usually what the society expects as a tremor.

So when you get that that's like a really important it's just be too slow for flutter to post.

You know it could be, it could be. Yeah it could be.

It's not. The only thing I would say is just that the way the P waves are, that they it should be the same all the way across the rhythm strip.

And it's really not like the very beginning of the rhythm strip.

They look a bit different. And then towards the end of a rhythm came up.

And if you find that and then doesn't show a tremor, then that's.

When you go over what's left. Axis deviation.

Yeah. That seems like I didn't actually put a little this.

Just because this is one of four images, this 116 is.

The hardest. So it's it's more of a left word access.

It's not exactly a left axis. So let's take a look at this. This is the closest thing to an isoelectric we have here is AVF right.

So where it's AVF right.

And we've got also when we're looking at the inferior leads it's positive in two.

So we've got two three AVF that are all our sort of inferior leads.

And they kind of tell us whether we're in the normal area or whether you're in, um, where whether you're, uh, more left axis when they're negative.

So sorry, this, this point, this direction that we're talking about was part of the circle.

So when we looked at so AVF and we say is it here or is it here, we can look at lead one.

And it tells us that one positive. We know that we the most negative lead that we have here is lead three, which puts us kind of a mess.

Like if we say that the axis is opposite leads to me usually in this first part of the left axis deviation,

what we refer to it as like left word axis rather than fully left axis.

Um, so it's, it's, it's kind of in that range.

So I would say it's kind of like -30 minus okay.

He. This is a 21 year old man presents to the emergency department after having a seizure.

The shows. Yeah.

Just. Yeah. Um. Yeah. Hi, Charlie. Yes.

Looks like two and a half ish boxes in between here. So heart rate of, like, 120, which is high.

Yep. Yep. So three boxes would be a hundred, and it's a little faster than that.

So I'd say 120 is a good estimate. Yeah. Um, it looks like therapy's before.

If you have still 30 regular. Yep. Um, and the heart rate generally looks very high.

Yeah. Um, evil looks pretty nice.

So electric. Uh. I'm sorry, do you want to say.

What do you think? It's sinus activity. Yes, I think it is. Yeah, I think so, too.

So sinus tachycardia. Sinus type?

Yeah. Um, I guess evil looks pretty isoelectric.

So I think in the heart, it's like in the right. Let me give you an idea.

If there's no speech, you really. Should put it on all the slides.

So we've got. Yeah AVL so let's close here.

So electric. So then what do we want to look at to see if it's positive or not.

See that one is positive which tells you that one is positive.

You can also see if two is positive which is positive. Yeah.

And so both of those look positive. Yeah. So I think it's probably both pointing in the right direction.

Yeah. Yeah. That's. Yeah. Um. Rest looks pretty normal, which feels pretty normal with everything.

Looks pretty normal. Yeah, looks pretty good. It's just fast.

Yeah. Just fast. And that's pretty typical for someone who's just had a seizure.

They have a ton of, uh, adrenaline around. Like, a seizure is an incredibly stressful physical event.

And so for them to have sinus type of cardio for a little bit afterwards, just as a compensatory thing.

Um, the thing that's a little unusual here, which, you know,

they don't talk about in the report or anything to people who are looking carefully at the P waves.

They look a little funny. And I think that's I think it's nothing in this case.

But if you were looking carefully at the p wave here, it's mostly down going in v one,

which would speak to a little bit of left air largement potentially, but it's not supposed to be part of this case at all.

So and uh, the rest of it is okay.

And so left atrial enlargement looked like mostly of going in be one or so left atrial enlargement would look like this.

But you would have that that key by trial also over here and see if you need to.

So the two things don't go together really well.

The other thing that can happen when you're tachycardic some of those rules got a little bit out of the window,

because the sinus node in real life is a region, it's not really just like point.

And when you're using a faster part of it, it's actually coming from a little bit higher.

And so that's why the P wave looks a tiny bit taller. But it doesn't meet really criteria for anything.

So um, obviously like generalized like smoke can look like this.

So these are taxes at best intervals and fuel prices.

That's. What I like to do for the PR interval I like to look at a career as that falls right on a heavy line inside of 200 milliseconds.

Right. So that looks pretty normal. Thanks.

Because it looks like about two boxes. Mark also is pretty much the same.

All right. Two and a half movie boxes and the T wave looks pretty good to see here.

You notice that were so fast that the two wave starts to run into the P wave a little bit.

But that can happen when the heart rate is high. So that's just sign stuff.

Just Kinesis.

This is an EKG ready for you. Okay.

Yeah, I guess so. Uh, I guess starting with the words, um.

Yeah, yeah. Sorry. No, um. Um.

Maybe like just under 50. Yeah. Sort of.

So this quest, this EKG is all about the brain. Um.

You know. So.

So look at the rhythm strip down the bottom of the. It goes all the way.

It's different. They're not. It's not constant. Yeah. It's not constant.

It's not constant. Um. So this is an example of something we talked about already earlier today.

That's that's not the. That's just the breathing. Yeah. So breathing.

So this is respiratory science are with me. Yeah okay. Yeah.

It's not as actually the other example was a nicer example of it because you usually see like well kind of a quarter of the of the hour intervals.

This one is a little, a little funny that like these ones seem like they're at one rate and then it slows down a little bit.

But this, this respiratory sinus movement. So it makes it hard to report the rate because sometimes it's slower and sometimes

it's faster and usually happens more when it's actually a young person,

a person that's nervous or in pain, uh, will have more exaggerated.

Uh, uh, that's pretty sensitive. Yeah, but on average, the heart rate is more like one of one of the tricks we do with irregular rhythms.

Sometimes this whole thing is six seconds, which can be catchy.

We'll usually take like, three seconds and count the number of accidents, or take six seconds and then count the number of dresses more perfect time.

And just like, just keep an average heart rate. So, you know, it's like sinus arrhythmia.

Arrhythmia, because it's like everything else besides the heart is, like, pretty normal.

And yeah, I know it's behaving as it should science.

So there are a few things we can look at. Right. Because it's not for sure that it's all science.

Right? So, uh, one of the things we can look at is the p wave access we were talking about before.

It's positive in week one, and it's positive in lead to.

So that suggests it's likely coming from the sinus node region.

The other thing though is we talked about something that is irregular where the females were coming from all different places,

which is called out wandering atrial pacemaker. Um, and in that the P waves, each one looks a little.

They're three different at least different morphologies.

And so the irregularity is from the different spots in the atrium that the energy peaks.

But if we look here at the P waves, they pretty much even though they're irregular, not really much the same.

They're not wildly different from one shock to similar.

And the p wave morphology is very similar. So it's probably not a wandering atrial pacemaker with, uh, exactly for the second year.

There's because that there's other thoughts I had, but yeah. Yeah. No, no, please continue with the other stuff.

Is it normal besides that? Nope I would so I would say it's not normal.

They didn't provide much other information in the answer key about it.

Please tell the others. Okay. Um, so I guess when we're looking at the axis, I think it has a relatively low axis.

Yes. That's right, because again, APL is so electric.

Yeah. And it's positive teeth. Yeah.

Yeah. Um, and uh, interval wise um, I guess.

I think it doesn't especially stand everything up since I know going out of order,

but I guess the thing that stood out to me first was in V1, if it was looking for as our prime.

Yes, that's very good. But then I was confused by that because I thought if that was indicative of like a burden on the left,

then maybe you'd have a deviation like I see deviations.

So what is the requirement for right from the branch block into your estimation?

Um, you it is it's a prolonged.

Yeah. It should be 120 or greater in the loss.

Yeah. But you're absolutely right. There is a little something there.

There's they don't talk about that here. Um, so it's very interesting.

It's so funny when you look at cases like, you know, people and there's all kinds of funny little things.

So does everybody appreciate this little thing. Yeah, that's a little for prime.

So this can be a normal variant. It's something called a Crysta pattern.

And it just has to do with the way that the bundle branches are sequentially activated in some people.

The reason that we're able to call it normal is that the q r s duration is normal.

Only thing I would say, though, is that there is a very small group of people so that this little terminal part of the crest complex,

if it's related to the right ventricle continuing its polarization,

is sometimes there are people diseases of the right ventricle that can also look like this.

So this could be something called an epsilon wave. We did not talk about this at all in the talks or anything.

When you see something like this it could be a normal variant.

But if this was some kid that was getting sent to you,

because every family member has a certain disease that involves remote control, this could be the first time that.

So it can be pathologic in the right circumstance.

Um, it's a it could be a first sign of some type of right ventricular cardiomyopathy.

So it's really good that you saw it, but you actually can't say that.

So about the rest of the EKG I would say is not.

So if you are reading this, if you felt like this was a normal.

Idea to sort of write RC crime scene in V1 normal QRS duration possible normal variant, but consider myocardial disease in the appropriate context.

Like that's the kind of stuff like that.

That's great. That's.

Going to have a history first one. Okay. I'm going to say that this is a 70 year old woman with complications.

I know you saying that because you're looking at these and seeing that. Are you just saying I'm.

Yes. I'm making up history consistent with the kitchen that we see.

So who's next? We were to the front row, which is. And are we starting on.

Okay, okay okay okay. Carry on. So starting with three.

We found so many times. Yeah, that's not bad.

Yeah, it's not too hard. It's not something that's, um.

Um. Well, heart rate seems generally right.

Yeah. Except for. A brief part of the week to go.

So just be reading. Yeah, there's so I would say it's it's completely regular, pretty much just like you said.

Except for one that's out of place, right. Okay.

And that's it's a great skill to have. Just kind of look at it for five minutes and play.

It all looks the same, except there's one, one beat that's out of place.

Right. So we'll come back to that in just a minute.

Do you think that it's sinus rhythm? I'm coming.

Up! He waves like normal.

And, um. Unless there's.

Unless I'm hallucinating. And then there's, like, a little bump here.

Yeah. No, I think they're okay. Yeah, I see what you're talking about.

You're talking about this little bump here. We usually look for those bumps in the road to something maybe not as important to look at it.

And we one that I'm not 100% sure if there's a, you know, back there and also kind of looks like both of these guys have it.

This one doesn't. So that's you know, I'm not sure the check for this particular thing with the positive.

Yeah. So that's consistent with coming from the sinus node which is a little funny that.

I sort of isoelectric in AVF.

Do you guys see that. What that suggests to me is that there's a chance that this is from part of the Krista Terminus.

We talked about that range that goes up and down the, uh, right atrium that's just below the sinus node.

All the stuff in the crista has the ability to be back up atrial pacemakers first, when the sinus notice to slow.

And sometimes older people have a little disease of their atria, sometimes they activate that.

They activate their sinus node through the crista terminus, uh, tissue.

So I think that's why the waves that look like it's a little bit.

Yeah. But then tell me about the actually, what do you think about it?

You have to figure out well, basically talking about the speeds here, we see we continue to come at the right time.

You have to think to yourself like, where did it come from? Is it wide?

Is it narrow? Can you see any evidence that there was a p wave in front of it?

I would say there isn't a feeling so gross.

Would you believe me if I said that? Even if there.

Everyone? Yeah. Yes. And also seen in V2.

So I think I think it's there. It's really hard to see in two with the moral of the story is to look at all cells that are activated simultaneously,

and see if you can see something that looks convincing. So I think that you can see that this is a key wave.

And you can also look and see to for a second see this play that's upside down here and see when the scientist one comes back.

They look different right. This one and this one they look different.

So what does that mean to you? This means.

It's coming from a different, like a different position.

Yeah. An ectopic atrial beat. Right. So it's an ectopic atrial beat or a premature atrial contraction.

All of those are the same, uh, type of thing.

So it's an extra beat for the upper chamber of the heart.

It's probably causing her palpitations because she can feel the irregularity of the beating, but it's totally benign.

So you can tell her I see what's causing it. You don't have to worry about it.

We don't really have to give you medications for that. Would they expect that?

Like, would you expect that to continue? I can yeah I can.

It's it can be annoying for the person. They're like that's great.

But can you make them go away and just very hard to make them go away.

Yeah. As far as identifying like delta waves for, for.

Yeah. For us. Yeah. To me the one in blue to kind of looks like like right on the two on this one here.

The ectopic. Oh this one. Yeah. And so and she's confused I guess.

Oh I see. What is a delta wave and what is. Right.

Right. So what I would encourage you to do. So you're thinking that here it looks like there might have been some slurring.

Is that where you are seeing it? Uh, yes. Yeah.

So what I would encourage you to do is, first of all, look at the place where the key makes the most clear.

Right. So here in v1 and v2, I would say they're the most clear.

And in both of those meetings, this PR is clearly a segment that lines up with the TCP segment that's isoelectric and is not getting,

uh, some activation during that time.

But it can be actually one of the most common fake outs for a delta wave can be, um, an ectopic atrial beat that occurs.

So if they're if they're really far leftward,

they have to conduct over to the AV node and you end up with the P wave in the she's kind of happening on top of each other

because some of the right atrial parts are getting activated at the same time that the QRS is just getting activated.

And so you can see some atrial slurring going into the SHS.

That looks like it could be, uh, delta wave.

But it's helpful really to look at some of the other beats and see if you see any evidence of that.

But that is actually a very common, uh, echo.

Yeah. For that. Yeah. I was going to ask just the direction of the sea wave, like give you answers to where it's coming from?

Yes. If mostly if it's negative in V2, do I know that it's like close to V2 and then going away.

Yes. Correct. Correct. Yeah. But with that. Absolutely.

So like this tells you and actually if you happen to see it in like one in APL,

like the most common sites of origin for these types of historic beats are either from the crista terminus or from the pulmonary vein ostia,

which would be all negative in the navel. So if you see them in all 12 leaves.

So usually the machine, when you acquire this, it prints it like this, but you can actually print it vertically so that all 12 reads are simultaneous.

So you could go back and take a look at all the P waves in all the leaves.

Um, from this and then from that you could localize where the origin of the wave is.

That's at what a lot of what people in my specialty do every day when we're trying to plan our procedures to say, oh, if we're going to go in there,

not for a pack, but supposing this was an atrial tachycardia that was coming from that area and we're like, oh, where do we want to go to zap it?

That's how we would try to figure it out before we start, so that we've kind of be prepared for where we want to go.

So yeah, the PR interval is a little bit long, I would say.

Is it like around like that's where it pieces out.

Like if you say that this is on the line here and some of the P wave or just like here,

you can see some of the feelings for say, the PR hospital probably is like 240.

It's a little bit of information that's there. It's going to be, uh, like start to fly.

Not yet because everybody has a few hours to somewhere.

So this is type one slot. PR is just a little bit prolonged.

Yes. So for delta wave. So you would expect like that's clear stop in period.

And then you don't see the stop in the P wave.

But if you see this kind of a T this this break between the p wave and the q

r s very unlikely that there's no delta wave there because you've got that,

that evidence that the envelope is being activated that time and that that flat area is right when the AP code is active.

You see like specifically you'll see more like Delta.

So like I told you guys it depends on the path.

Right. So sometimes you will see more delta wave in certain leads to other things.

In this kind of a case, it would be very unusual to see the delta wave only on the top of feet and not on the other.

So like if we left these guys before the delta, before the topic meet, these don't look really like they have any smaller.

So probably if it's only if we're seeing it on the topic of Delta.

Does everything cool with that. So is next.

Okay. For the reasons. Yes.

Yes. Yes. Right.

I do see what you do for your house.

Yeah. Um. And.

I think for us it just seems normal.

As a field. I do think that the access is also pretty normal.

Yeah, a little bit to the left, but still probably normal.

Tell me more about together. Take a look at the rhythm strip below.

Like the wheat that goes all the way across. Is there anything about that that like.

Concerns you a little bit. It's.

Extra. Yeah. So not all the P waves have QRS.

So that's a problem. Right. So we have to figure that out. So that's the key part of the rhythm is to see whether all the pupils have crosses.

The first thing we should ask ourselves just do the p wave.

Sort of look at this form like all the pieces.

Do you think they kind of look the same? Yeah.

Yeah, I would say so. And we can also verify up here too,

because one of the things that can happen is there could be an ectopic beat and that disease is locked into the ventricle.

And that could be why we're having this problem. But we just like all the sinus rhythm.

That's a little more concerning right. So what do we see I think the P waves, even the ones that block look just like the ones that you got to across.

Right. Yeah. So what do you think about that?

What would you call it? Pretty.

Um, so I think it's more what we were just talking about.

So when they're, when the P waves never make it to the show as it's either happening at the level of things.

So there's the first sign. If there's some problems between the atrium of the ventricles is the first degree to our problems.

And so that's what we were talking about.

And this previous one at the time it takes from the p wave comes because it just exceeds the normal upper limit of normal which is 200 milliseconds.

Right. But still every p wave has excess.

So everything is still going through it just fine.

Here not everybody wave has a QRS, but there's a relationship between the ones that do conduct this.

QRS seems plausibly to have happened from this, right?

Um, so this is a type of second degree heart block.

Now, this wasn't the best example in some ways,

because you can't tell me which type of heart block this is because it is what we call 2 to 1 heart block.

There's you can't tell me if the pupils are getting longer, longer or longer and then drop it,

or if they're all the same, and then dropping because each, every other one is dropping.

So this is some kind of second degree heart block. You can't really say which one.

Which is a little bit unfortunate, but I think this you would want to like show an example.

Let us write out which one is which. But I would say this one there.

If I was asking one of my electrophysiology fellows at the hospital, there are some things that they could say about it.

Um, what you could say is, like you said, the QRS is narrow.

So that speaks against there being significant disease in the historical system.

So maybe that's makes it more likely that the block is happening at the level of the AP node,

and that it's more likely to be the wanky block type of block. But you can't prove that one way or the other.

If it's 2 to 1 like this, and you never see any more strings of that of the beats, like, uh, to tell whether it's an AP note or not.

And this person probably meets some criteria for LV h.

So the RF here. This one you might find 20, 25, 30, 35 like well over 35 and a slightly leftward axis.

So that those things probably this person has some. Other stuff that.

Passes on a third degree plate.

Can someone answer that? Why is it not third degree? Pretty sure.

Um, but we still see that there's some correlation was there and there being no correlation between data and correct records.

Exactly.

So if it was third degree heart block, we'd see the P waves going, you'd see the ventricles going, and there'll be no relationship between the two.

In this case, there is a clear relationship between the connected ones.

Like I'm pretty convinced, looking at this, that physics came from this dissolution of beats, but this one blocked.

So that second degree hard fork, if they're going to fix.

Yeah. Type. Well we don't know type one or type two from this equation because we if it was type

one we'd want to see the PR intervals get longer and longer longer and then drop.

And if it was type two we'd see them all be the same. And we can't tell that from A to give a situation one,

because you don't get a sense of whether the PR s are always the same before it drops, or whether they're lengthening before they drop.

It's not. Let me see. Yeah. Let me see if there's an example.

See? Like this one. We'll just skip ahead for a moment. This is case 11.

Take a look. Just the sea waves. So here's the waves.

They're going along like this. And this is a good example of what you see as you step away from it a little bit.

You can see this. The piece of shoes is are grouped right.

And then the other thing you say is okay why are they grouped.

They're grouped because the PR interval is going from this to this one.

This one comes in. It's blocked. I have to go back to the PR interval.

Is this. And then it's this. This one is blocked right.

So that's an example of the type one seconds of three heart blocks.

Right. Right. So that's more likely to be the Ave nodes.

And the reason we can tell is because the PR interval is getting longer or longer or longer and then drops.

Right. If we saw something exactly the same.

But the PR interval stayed like this a whole time until it blocked.

So it's like normal. Job.

Then you can tell that it's a type two. Well that's type type two block right.

What would the PR also be a little bit longer. Usually yes.

But sometimes it's hard to tell. Like this particular example is probably another health protecting patients and abnormal because it's a little wide.

Like it's not normal output. It's not the normal.

It's not a Franklinton branch. So like this.

So let me go back here. So this is our line.

So the problem with a 2 to 1 it's very hard to say.

There's some things you can use to predict. And so like when we do our testing.

So if I see a person like this it might be that if this is from the Ave you don't need a pacemaker but it's from lower conduction disease.

They need a pacemaker.

I can actually put a catheter in at the level of the Ave node in the hospital and see exactly what part of the heart is blocking.

Like you can do that. In a diagnostic electrophysiology study, we can measure the different the activation of the different parts.

Um, I think we have the same thing. Okay. Yeah.

So like the is it like an accent or like around there?

It's it's a leftward axis.

I would say the only reason I say leftward in that left axis deviations distance two is a little positive, more positive than it is negative.

But it's it's in that general place. Yes.

It's around -30. Yeah.

And then my other question was um, so would you like find out there's something really large that you actually to do something about that.

So we usually do an echocardiogram, um, which is an ultrasound of the heart where they measure the chambers and take a look.

It also might give you a little bit of an idea, like how risky it is to put in place.

So for example, advice I've had the experience where somebody shows up like this, they need a pacemaker.

They've had very little work up in their past, like they've not left their house for like a decade.

Nobody's examined them at all. And they show up like this.

And you see that EKG and they're like, huh? Because one of the things that can give an elderly person hypertrophy is aortic stenosis,

which is, uh, narrowing of the valve at the top of the heart.

And that's a calcified disease that people usually get as they're older.

And that's something that if you're sitting doing nothing, you might not feel that much, but you put them through a procedure and they could die.

So you look at this and you're like, huh, I think I might want to get a echocardiogram before we go to the procedure.

Realistically, probably nobody would end up going through the procedure without getting an ultrasound of their heart.

But you really want to make sure they get good views of the aortic valve for a patient like this.

So it definitely helps him see the big picture of what's going on with the patient.

The other thing is that there are plenty of other stuff we see on the EKG that you might want to cause.

Like for example, if it looks like they're having a heart attack at the same time, if they're having the heart block,

then it starts to be a question of like, do they get the heart attack fixed before they go for the pacemaker and that kind of stuff?

So it helps all of that stuff helps you to kind of do like the next few hours.

Is. Up next.

Up there it's about like 70 to 75 beats per.

Yes. Um. The rhythm. I only keep waves.

Uh, it's one specific heartbeat.

That's so half of the beat. The first half of the beats have two is.

Except for the beats. Do not have to stay inside here.

So maybe first, just talk about the ones that do have a few names, because those are the sinus activated beats.

Uh, they look normal to me. Acceptors like.

No, uh, t waves after.

Yeah. So the T waves are messed up a little. Yeah. I'll give you, uh, we'll talk about that maybe after we figure out the other BS.

But the M, if we look at, like, the waves, they're positive and one positive into right for the opiates.

Right. Um, and the QMS is narrow.

How about the axis? It looks a little bit left toward the beach.

Not too far. I would say it's looks okay. It's positive in AVF.

I think it's probably pretty normal. I mean to us three is maybe isoelectric.

So I used to isolate chicken with sausages.

So probably in the normal ish area I see.

And here we see uh, our main progression is pretty normal because is pretty narrow.

But I totally agree with you. The two waves look kind of wacky.

And I would say to you, maybe we can take a measure that keeps you very accurately because of those other beats that are coming in.

Okay, so tell me about the other meats. Um.

They look larger. Um, and yes, that was larger.

And they're also um, and they're also like the S is when something else exists.

So the first thing when you see extra beads, I'll say, are they wide, are they narrow?

I think they're wider. Wide lens wide.

Which means what did we say that it means when they're wide it's usually.

It's not true. Two choices. One is that they could be a bundle branch block, and the other is it could be coming from the ventricular muscle mass.

Right. Um, so one of the things we look for with the extra beat, just like we did with the premature atrial beats, we looked for some P waves.

Right. And do you see any P waves in front of this.

No not so I know p waves. So we think it's probably not coming from the upper chamber of the heart at all.

Right. So then where is it coming from. The ventricle region.

Yes, yes. So probably from the ventricles. Yeah.

So if we have extra beats coming from the lower chamber of the heart, what do we call them?

Please, please, please write premature ventricular contractions or premature contractions.

And I mentioned this once unto states when we have them in a part of life just for the time.

There's a name for that. It's called by Germany and it's called ventricular.

By Germany because the extra beats are coming from the ventricle.

If these work, you can have the extra beats from the atrium do the same thing.

You could have a little pattern of 2 to 2 for the actual beats.

Then it would be called atrial by German. But this is an example.

Every number as much. Yeah. Every other as by Gemini.

Right? I want you to try Gemini. Right.

Would be, would be to sign speeds and one PVC to sign a speed sign on.

Previously we try Gemini. And that terminology only applies to premature contraction.

No also to atrial assaults. But in that case it would be an atrial beat.

Right. But it's a pattern of beatings. That people can with their extra beat sometimes.

So for the heart rate, we're still looking between like a normal clearance and then like actual circuits.

Yeah. So they all count towards the heart rate because they do generate like a little bit of cardiac output.

They may not be as good as the normal beats, but at least you know, in terms of just reporting if you report all the complexes on this part of heart.

So on this graph of that around like one 25 minutes.

Yeah, it's a little bit it's hard to know because these two are too close together and these two are too far apart.

So I would say that I would take this and multiply it by two, you know what I mean?

Let's, uh. Yeah. So it's probably like right around 100. I think this one's.

It's like seven, so it's like just under a hundred. I would say.

Yeah. Um, so I went I was wrong at first.

Um, but I guess just a clarification question. So if you were to have something that was like an accessory pathway.

Yes. I went down the accessory pathway first and then had students cells and production lines.

The rest like that would have all of your complexes be why do you have like.

Yes. So you had AVR T that was Anti-drone mic that was going down the accessory pathway.

Every single would be fast. First of all you regular.

Yeah. And they would all be wide okay. But then you would see you live because you would still have a drill polarization.

You would. So aft at the terminal part of the shows you would keep it on at some p-wave retrograde.

Um, unless it's like hidden, in which case it could be hidden.

And honestly, in real life, difficulty waves start to become really wacky and it can be very hard to see.

So like one of the big questions in cardiology, like when you see a wide, complex,

regular rhythm that takes up, you know, say it's 150 beats a minute, is it 50 or is it what you're describing?

Like that's like a big question of trying to figure out.

And so the things that we look for are like if you have the dissociation.

So if you see some p waves that are associated from the rhythm,

that will help you say that it's ventricular tachycardia instead of what you're describing.

Uh, but if you always see a p wave, it's not even perfect.

Like one of these things. You realize that that's why we have, in case testing, correct some of these.

So even if you imagine a young person with congenital heart disease who has to be tagged and their AP note is really good,

they do not have the dissociation, you know, just good enough to conduct retrograde off every beat of their ventricular tachycardia.

You'll see the conduction on their feet. So it can be really confusing.

Sometimes we actually take them for a diagnostic study.

Exactly. For that reason to try to sort that out. You're talking about, like the difference between be talking and listen.

Yeah, yeah, we're talking about the difference between like.

We're talking about the difference between an accessory pathway.

We're doing this. And if.

And if you tak where you're doing this something you happen to go up the AP note on every bit of the V tack.

As they all look. They could look really, really similar on the EKG.

So we put catheters in like that with multiple electrodes, and we do stuff to try to sort that out in the lab.

But this is could not be that. This is not that.

Yeah. This is not bacteria. You're not gonna get this. No no no.

So if you if you're doing this what your rhythm looks like is this with the wrenches if you.

So it's tachycardic. But they're all right. They should all be the same.

And they should each one have a retrograde wave on it that they also have that, uh, that's the wave as well.

They. Well, so that's what makes it so tricky, is that sometimes the two wave on top of the p wave can make it a little unclear,

but usually that's like in the two wavelength.

You can still see those little bite taken out of the t wave to see the retrograde angles.

Yeah, but it can it can be a little down. Yeah.

So I called again. This is oh this is called TV.

Two. And it can be and this is the side.

So the two types of AVR are named for the direction through the AV node.

So if it goes backwards through the AV node it's anti-drone IC.

And it makes a wide complex because then QRS comes from here right.

If it's or from drone which is the more common one, it goes down in the node and up the bypass tract.

And that makes it narrow complex. And then it's a cycle.

And the of the second one is v tach.

So this is like you have a pacemaker in the ventricle that shouldn't be there.

And one of the things we had said yesterday or Tuesday is that we looked for evidence and veins association to prove that it was v tach.

Right. But if you've got a young person who's AV node is really slick,

they could potentially have v tach where every beat connects retrograde and could look a lot like that.

So you could be confused as to what's happening. Um, we just want to clarify, uh, abnormal literacy.

Um, and one is not interpreted as, like, um, in the direction we want pointing.

If you have a, uh, a beef that is appreciating individuals and we start away and then point towards and back away from the one, or is that sort of.

Yes. Yes, that's actually right.

So what we usually do so like and so for example, in my line of work, we might be looking in this patient to zap those places to get rid of them.

Right. And one of the ways we look is we see the axis of these beads.

And what we see is that we get this one and yellow, which means that its origin is really leftward.

Um, so that what you're saying about the, um,

the sort of notching that you see of the QRS from the the PVC is a really interesting phenomenon way beyond this class, really.

But, um, beats like this tend to come from that outflow tract of the heart.

So the aortic outflow tract. So the left ventricle ejects through that outflow tract to the left ventricle.

FDA we're in a canal today. We're in, uh, right. And then there's the right cruncher call.

It checks out the monarch valve to the lungs.

And those two structures are, like, right on top of each other.

Like that. When you have something that gets activated from behind and left leftward, it actually has to split and go around like that.

And it produces two wavefronts of activation in the ventricles that produces that fractionation.

This is like mutual. We don't know that information, but that's why it's there.

Yeah. Just to cook? Yes, because of the anti-drug emphasis.

Yes. So you would say. Would you say anti-drug is more associated with like two of the very same interests of the.

So this is technically not a fancy, but it's, it's a wide complex tachycardia.

That's what we're talking about. Some things that could cause a wide complex time investment.

Yeah. Investment. Exactly. So yeah. So the two choices for SVT.

So for SVT and to what we call a five complex tachycardia, what are the things that could be going on.

One is that we could have. You could have basically an SVT say an RV.

No reentry that's going around and around in the center of the heart you have these two bundle branches, right?

This is the left bundle of the two positions, the right bundle.

But when you go fast, the right bundle can't keep up.

So you have a bundle branch blocked during the tachycardia.

So that's a baronetcy. So that's like you're getting a right [INAUDIBLE] branch block during tachycardia.

So that'll look just like a regular right bundle branch block that you've seen for other things.

But it'll go back to normal once the tachycardia stops. It's just that this bundle can't handle the tachycardia.

Just functionally you can do it at whatever heart rate it is.

And that could happen on the right side or the left side. So that's one possibility for a wide complex tachycardia that's also in SVT.

The other possibility for a wide complex tachycardia SVT sky.

So if you're going down the accessory pathway and up the AV node, it produces a wide complex rhythm.

From this part of the heart is a retrograde. At this point, I think that's a lot that's like more detail.

So, you know, just super briefly, the famous AV. Yes, yes.

Just so even Aki is the one where.

It is. And so this is AV and is that AP plate.

So in the AP I'm just going to draw that little monitor beside the snow.

And this is crazy. So the idea is that you have two pathways in the AP code.

One is fast and one is slow. So in the normal situation you have a signal coming from the atrium that's heading to the AV node.

This guy doesn't think that because it's blocked and you have a fast pathway going through right.

You have an ectopic beat. Can you guys see is this too far over?

Yes, you can see that. So the next one,

if you have the extra beat that comes in it blocks in the fast pathway and has conduction down the slow pathway that goes to the ventricle.

And if that time is long enough we turn around and find that guy available.

And then you basically have this.

Just the tachycardia. So that's in the center here.

And that's the one we looked at the activation pattern. You can see the atrium in the ventricle activated at the same time.

Right. Do you guys want to look at that? You don't have to show your face, actually.

That's right. It's just that there is, like, an intervention rather than.

Like there is a base maker that is different and it's just lost.

It's just sending itself. Yeah. And it blocks is with, uh, it may be connected to the atrium, but it's so wide.

So. Yeah. You just couldn't have.

I can't say what's happening to the p waves in the middle of this business.

It doesn't, it doesn't. This is a rhythm.

So the rhythm is sinus with control by jamming.

That's what you call a sinus function. Killer ten. Uh, sorry.

I've never seen for a second time.

Um. You just. Thanks.

Next question please. Sorry. So this was the one that was about our town.

It's a circuit that involves the Abbey road, which is right here.

And if you look at the atrium and kind of get activated at the same time, it's right up to the atrium.

And at the same time, it's the one where we see the p wave just peeking out after us.

So it's quite retrograde. It's still retrograde. It's just because a lot of geology keeps out.

Like that is a lot of activations happening during the QSL.

And this is just like the variations part of the tactics which you see there.

And you'll see a bunch of equipment better and considerably worse, a little more.

So is that what happened? That's what happened. So sorry about that. Okay.

So do you have any questions?

Okay. So you have so so so are you guys talking about over there.

So do we need to go and explain it to.

Is everybody else. We could we can. You know, I have another question.

I'm just trying to understand what would be the biological reasons for this.

Uh, yeah. So first, uh, I don't know.

I feel like that's if D5 and B2, maybe there's a little bit of hype there.

Yeah, not really sure. So probably not because it doesn't mix for 35 years.

So if there's a down going component then maybe not in time.

So probably like 32mm is only the dome complex.

And yeah, only the down part that only the upper part I 76 I'm sure.

So why would you have the PVC then.

Right, right. So this is um it's one of those mysteries.

A lot of it's one of the most common mistakes that people get.

They confuse is what people think is during cardiac development,

the heart starts as a long two and kind of the pacemaker cells are young and and the heart

twists around to make the heart shape that we have with the outflow tracts and everything.

And it's very common for some of those cells.

I call them pacemaker cells.

Sometimes they're really transitional cells to wind up in different parts of the heart that can wake up near the valve annually,

near the inward and colorful monarch, the less common route, the pipe mitral valve.

This one actually looks like it's probably near the mitral valve.

And people are like, oh, well, if I've had them since I was a fetus, like, why don't why didn't I have it when I was a child?

Um, here's a guy at Cornell who's, like, spent his whole life trying to clear these beats out, and he feels like there's a secondary hit hypothesis.

So this transitional cells are there, they're quiet, they're dormant, but there's things that can turn them off.

Like we see people after Covid infection, they get turned on.

Even a very stressful experience can turn them on.

I had a guy which was planning his daughter's wedding, and he developed them just before the wedding was about to start.

The stress. I think that's the wedding, but it was a happy thing, but still stressful thing.

Um, so if that can happen, and this is also the thing that I mentioned, it can happen with ovulation.

Um, it can happen during pregnancy.

So we see these a lot of the time, just this one time. But it can happen in people with normal hearts.

But if you have a lot of these extra beats like this much, this person, if they're like this all the time, 50% of their heart beats abnormal.

It can cause a heart attack to. It can cause a 20% loss for these types.

Extra beats last week. Just to clarify, you mentioned that this was like yeah, even throw it.

So the sinus describes the ventricular function. So because the like here are some regular design.

And so these so you can have a lot of different conversations right.

So this is part of our sinus rhythm under conducting stress.

You could imagine something where you have say atrial fibrillation but also frequent PVCs.

Right. And so that that could be then you wouldn't have like people have inside of every few hours like that, the narrow ones.

So the sinus accounts for the normal. And then when you say risk ventricular like I mean you've got accounts for that.

Um, right. Because that tells you that like you would expect.

So if someone told me that I know that only every other being has a p wave and only every other BS has a Y to us.

Yeah. So that's.

She went to church. Sorry.

This is for no reason to justify.

Somebody. So what do you think about this?

Are you up? Do you want to do this one? Sure. Um.

So. The heartbeat is just fast.

Let's fast. It's. I'm getting, like, maybe 100 4030 beats per minute.

Maybe not that fast, but I give you 110 for sure. Okay.

Yeah. Um, so it's some form of tachycardia.

Um, at the peak, she seems very consistent.

Yeah. So I leads me to believe that the sinus node is, like, behaving the way it should.

So, like super ventricular. Uh huh. And, like, the connection is like super signs.

Tach, excited tachycardia, fast times. Uh, it's a little hard to see the feelings.

Yeah, like there, there. I think it's just the technicalities make sense.

And then this is kind of where I get a little unsure, so I'll probably say a lot of wrong things, but,

um, v2 and V5, like I'm assuming it's really high in B5 because it's not as it's like the other one.

Yeah. So I'm like some less ventricular hypertrophy.

Yes. Um, and I was like a little unsure though,

because it seems like AVF is the isoelectric axis and it looks like a normal and does its own axis is negative than it is positive.

So I would say it's at least leftward. Okay.

Yeah, I would say because just just because it's a little more left and a little more down doesn't go away.

I would put it towards the left, but it's not exactly two.

It's quite positive. So it's not like marked. It's just a little bit left okay.

Um and then I'm not too sure, but at least the baseline doesn't seem to have too much like movement or sway.

And it's kind of goes back to like, I think it was in terms of solitude.

I don't know if I see a solid pattern, but I thought it was solid. And I think we already said, right, there's a p wave.

And just so I thought that there was a sawtooth, it would imply there's like atrial flutter,

which is it should I was once you say sinus rhythm, you focus on simple stuff.

I have some other questions like how do you know if it's so what distinguishes like sinus

tachycardia and super ventricular tachycardia so that the p wave may not be consistent.

Yeah. Yeah. And um, some people would call sinus tachycardia form of superficial okay.

Because it is technically. But it doesn't have to be the primary problems like this person from history.

It's probably because they're having a heart failure episode. They can't reach their tachycardia.

Right. So yeah, that that's all I had to say about. Yeah.

No that's great. And so I think there's I don't know why they give us an EKG that has this on it.

This is my guess. That's like. That but um, the other things to look at.

Um, there's maybe he doesn't really meet criteria for, uh, for atrial enlargement here, but the Q are but the p rate is pretty down going in V1.

So I wouldn't be surprised if the left atrium is a little big.

The other thing is we talked a little bit about repolarization changes.

So when you have ventricular hypertrophy, if you look at sometimes b five and six but certainly six,

you'll see this t wave inversion like what you see here.

And that's that goes along with that approach. And we also see wave inversion in Neat1 and APL.

So when you see those repolarization abnormalities it sort of makes me think that's like which is really tricky.

So I would expect this kind of thing. And that's because sorry to like but so that's a tricky question.

So it's it's one of these things that does happen the repolarization.

We actually didn't talk about the T waves here too. So there's a lot that happens with repolarization of the heart.

You notice like in my talks I didn't really talk very much about repolarization of the heart.

There's a lot we don't understand about it. So p v C is in this case themselves can affect the repolarization of the heart.

There's something called the T wave memory. So people will ask like why is this two wave inverted.

And usually the t wave memory follows the direction of the wide.

So most those two waves are upside down here are related to to the right of memory near the origin of the seas.

But here why does that hypertrophy cause this neutralization difference?

Tell you a good explanation what it does?

I know that it does. For a lot of the people who have circular hypertrophy there's delayed depolarization.

So it makes for delayed peaceful resolution. But there are plenty of people like this that have a totally narrow QRS.

So they don't I can't really tell you that they're having delayed depolarization, but it still changes their causation factor.

And so in this case, is it that because the two weeks long it's, it's, uh, Deputy Vegas upside uh, it's upside down.

And this segment is this part we haven't talked to. Is going to talk to you about two segments a little bit more when he talks about corners.

But the S2 segment is slightly easier fast. And easy is that the S2 segment slightly depressed.

But really the T wave is upside down. Yeah.

So. So we just say normally t waves like the direction to wave should be the same as particular.

So in general. But that's,

it's a very bad generalization because then they're also when the QRS is applied a T wave tends to go opposite in the direction of the QRS.

So it's it's and it's not a whole lot like memorize.

Uh, I don't know if you mentioned this, I just missed it, but is the.

Is what we're seeing in B2 at the end of B2 are factors, and that's a fact.

Yeah, that's what I was saying. Oh, sorry. Yeah, yeah. I don't know why they gave us.

That's like the thing. The other thing is, if you see something like this and you don't see it on any other simultaneous axes,

you know, it's most likely it's just not stuck to the patient very well.

I think we're almost done. So I guess you guys just get some fatigue.

I don't know, did they have food and stuff yesterday? Yeah. Yeah.

That's cool. I was waiting. For this stuff, so we saw it.

Yeah. Uh, just to clarify, this night. Yes.

Um, with the band concert by generally. Yes. This.

Did we start from the left side of the heart? Yes it does.

It does. It's the it's probably coming from the top of the mitral and it's so like and so that miter annulus is one and two like this.

And it's coming from up here. So it's coming from left word and making one APL negative.

And it's heading down towards the inferior leads a little bit. So it's a little bit positive in the inferior leads.

Um and something we never talked about before.

But if stuff is starting at the base and heading towards the apex, it tends to be positive in these five and six.

So that kind of tells us that. That is probably Basil.

Yeah, you can that. You definitely also don't have to go necessarily.

So we already kind of did this one. But you want to. Everybody knows to be back here at the beginning.

Just. What do you think?

Yeah. Like it. Was it hard to calculate the heart rate? Yeah.

Just seems. Um.

Yeah. So it looks like a little bit bunched together. The beats are like this.

Too close together. There's no space left to close together in this case, right?

Yeah. So when they're irregular, one of the cheats, you can do it.

Since this is six seconds, you can count the number of shares.

That can give you an idea of what the heart rate was. On six, three, five.

Six. Seven. Eight. Ten. 11.

Yes. The heart rate's around 110. Right?

Because if you multiply the number. So this is if this is six seconds is how many cures is happening in 60s 60s.

Yeah. That each each EKG is six seconds.

That means, like, the five, five big boxes.

So then what do you think of the list? Some, uh, some of them have come.

On. Yeah, yeah. So first let's look at the p wave shape.

Do we think that it's likely that they're coming from the other side as well?

Seem to been talking about the whole time something positive and leave wise and the positive in week two.

Is it likely that they're coming from the side as well? Which is that. Yeah.

Yeah. Right. So you know. Right.

So then does each p wave have a q r s? Let's see if we can identify the females that may have a q r us.

Just this play where you can see my plane. This place does not have a cross.

Yeah. Yeah. It does. Right. So let's take a look at what the P waves are.

Maybe I'm going to put my marker on the P waves.

There's the scalp. Mr. There's the skull.

And. Right. If you had to say the imprint of the P waves, what would you say?

How many boxes apart? I'm sorry, I can say.

There was three boxes. Yeah. So three and maybe a little bit change.

So maybe just a little bit less than 100ft a minute.

So maybe it's a minute. So we've got p waves and to the P waves kind of all look the same.

Yeah. Yeah they do. So it's looks like there's probably a sinus mechanism going on a heart rate of 90 or so all the way through.

But the thing that's changing is the relationship to the q r s.

So the q r s this is across. This is across.

This is the class. And this is class associates.

Right. So does this p wave that occurs.

Yes. Does this p wave have a collapse. This one does.

Does this one have a q r s. Yes I one.

So what do you notice about these £0.03 waves.

And their relationship to the q r s is the time from the atrium to the ventricle almost the same.

You know what's happening. Shorter or longer?

It starts off looking like this, right? And the next one is getting longer.

Right? So it starts off first and gets longer, and then the next one has no cure associated.

It blocks. So what does that make you think that.

You talked about the different types of block that there are.

So the first thing that we've talked about is that the PR interval could get longer.

That would be first degree 84. But the very next phase is this thing that happens in the, you know, it can get longer and longer, longer and block.

And that's the first type of second degree heart block.

It's sometimes called when you have enough. So this is called second degree type 184.

And the reason it's called that is because you see this phenomenon that that

key waves that your interval gets longer and longer before it drops the beat.

Does that make sense? Yeah. It means that that block is happening most likely at the level of interest, because that's how they're able to find us.

Are there any questions about this one? We can talk about the cures and stuff if you want to dispense a little.

I have a really dumb question. Yes. About the length of the strip?

Yes. Every five big boxes is one second. Yes.

That's correct. Yeah. And most of them, you'll see. I don't know if you saw them here that they'll be heavier like that.

So you can actually line up with one second. Easier to see one second because then the TV, TV boxes are each 40 milliseconds.

The heavier boxes are 200 milliseconds.

And then there are lines that are correct, like five box increments.

You like your taxes to be one second. Makes it really easy to see.

See that's that's what. I'm going to need from some of the curious stuff on this one, because there's some weird stuff going on.

I don't know. I'm. So glad to do the next one.

Sort of draft or all the way around. So let's.

Just go. Through.

Okay. Who wants to do this one? I cannot, and I shall go ahead.

Um, heart rate's, uh, irregular.

Yes. Um, so what's the average out rate?

Um, I said this is six out of ten. This is six. Okay.

It was. 20 times an hour.

Yeah. It's not quite that fast because the fastest ones are one.

Maybe these ones are okay. Yeah. Yeah. So I would say it ranges from probably 80 on the slowest ones to like 150 or 170 on the tightest one.

So somewhere between fast. Um.

And distance. And so what?

So tell me, when was this one? There's some drift being that was happening.

Right? And it was irregular. Partly because. Yeah, this one irregular it is.

It's a genuinely irregular profit.

And that means that it's, uh, like, uh, that means that rhythm is it's, uh, ventricular, you know, atrial atria because it's narrow in relation.

Right. It's okay because we don't see the, uh, the Milky Ways.

Yeah. So sorry. We should have done it more as device by step by step.

So do you see any teammates here or on any.

Do we see any future? No, no. There's some little wiggles that we see here.

But other than that, I don't see any organized Puma activity anywhere.

The rhythm is irregularly and rhythm is narrow, so we're not worried it's ventricular fibrillation.

There could be much, much to our system. The QRS is a narrow.

Side. So this is atrial fibrillation.

So the hallmark of stimulation is usually irregularly irregular.

Um and this is basically if if it's narrow, it means it's time for the eight, you know to produce the irregularly or restless.

So we probably don't need to do too much of the rest of the EKG.

But does everybody see how it's equal? Why is there no interest?

Yeah. So if you ask me, some kid x ray vision and you could see the atria in sinus rhythm, you would see the sinus node fine.

And they contract like that in atrial fibrillation.

What's actually happening is there's continuous rapid atrial activity throughout the year.

So it never stops. If you had a, uh, ultrasound it could look at the atrium.

During that time you would just basically see there's no organized contract contraction happening.

It just sort of looks like a bag of worms. The whole upper chamber of the heart doesn't contract at all.

So the reason you don't see an organized p wave is because literally there is no contraction of the atrium that's happening.

It's just this kind of. And then what drives just right.

So he's. Yeah. So these random rapid signals in the atrium, they bombard the AV node sometimes that every node is refractory and doesn't work through.

Sometimes it lets them through. And that sort of pattern of or not lack of pattern of random compartment creates.

The main job is that the signals in the upper chamber of the heart are more than 400 beats per minute,

and that even those because it slows the impulses from that presentation to the ventricle.

That's what protects you so much to the trick killer fibrillation when you have atrial fibrillation.

So don't call it what it's ventricular fibrillation, right ventricular fibrillation.

You usually don't get an EKG like this because the patient's having like a cardiac arrest.

So there are a lot of rhythm stresses of ventricular fibrillation.

But I can show you from the previous. Slide.

So if you imagine something very similar happening, but even slower chain for us apart.

So ventricular fibrillation usually looks sort of like that.

There. There's the you know, that's there's this is only ventricular activation.

So what's happening in ventricular fibrillation is similar to what I was just saying for chamber of the heart.

Instead of the upper chamber doing this, it's like it's it's getting rapid activation in the ventricle.

Usually like in this example that I've shown here is when this has a coronary artery,

has blocked off a full chunk of muscle that doesn't get any blood flow, and some of it's dying and some of it's alive.

And it makes the electrical properties of the heart very heterogeneous and unstable.

And the person goes into a very, um, unpredictable blockage.

Like if you had to assign a heart rate to this, I don't even know how it got see, more than 300 beats a minute for sure.

Okay. If you had a blood pressure trace. And during that off, there should be.

No Stiles ejection from the heart at all.

Even in the more people have ejection from the heart.

But during circulation there's nothing. So this is basically the patient is resting.

They have a cardiac arrest and they have to be shot.

And then during that, um, time phase like that atria contract, they might be it depends on whether the it depends on the health of the patient.

Otherwise like sometimes the P waves will be going on for a little while like this.

But as the body gets sicker and sicker, they'll stop working to model.

Model? Uh, you could have this false, but could you have a pulse with, like, 151?

And is the reason that we see signal here just because it's larger.

We zoomed in so we see yes I just I would actually yeah.

Let me see if I can actually show you like during each of the relation there is um we had like one little we went by a really fast.

This is like the start of atrial fibrillation, with a catheter sitting in the right upper pulmonary vein.

And so all it sees is atrial activity. So it's right sitting right at that blue spot right there.

If this is a sinus rhythm beats there's a P.A. It takes a little funny because we've slowed down or sped up the paper speed.

So you can see all the little signals. But up in sinus rhythm you see one type of deflection.

The one that's good relation starts a local electric gram that you measure right here.

So you can see all the rapid activity. That's if you have like right there at the heart.

I don't. Think this.

This is just like the. Third block.

Very good. So this one is you. You see the people?

This is a great one for the. Use a little piece of paper if you really want to result.

Like put a piece of paper up to this where I can see the p waves.

So I'll make a little tick on my paper here and here, and then I'll bring it back here and say, oh, I think that's a page and I'll bring it back here.

That's a picture. That's a P wave. There must be one in here somewhere.

And you know, the sense that you can just go back and take a look at as I went through there.

But it helps you to find the p waves as you go over the strip.

But what you notice is that the P waves and the shores have no apparent relationship.

There's no P wave in front of this guy. There's a p wave in front of this guy.

It's motion wave in front of this guy. But there's a P web peeking out right after the q r s there.

The other thing that you'll notice is that the showers are pretty regular.

And so that usually implies that there's no influence from the upper chamber of the heart.

To the lower chamber. So that's going to be hard for.

Any questions about that one? That's purely about the maternity care.

So does anyone want to try this one? One.

Okay, so. So this is supposed to be a 28 year old woman with palpitations and lightheadedness.

So, okay, I'll say it's irregular. Yes. Um. Is Regency?

Um, is it narrow or is it liberal? Correct.

Correct. There are no beats in your wife. Um. And I think the narrow beats, it's pretty slow speed.

It goes pretty fast, like, sort of narrow, slow and, uh, wide.

Cursors fast. Yeah. And where. So where are the narrow leads coming from?

Oh, sinus. I see. Yeah. And if you go on YouTube, everybody see, that's a huge positive.

Um, and you can see that looks pretty narrow.

You can see I need to in front of each cross.

That's narrow. We see a way. So that's great in normal accidents.

Yeah. That's sort of the sort of the narrow of the valley looking at the narrow leads.

Right. There's access that's normal intervals.

What do you think? I saw that stuff. Let's get a narrow view to those.

Yeah. Okay, good. Pretty good. The T wave again is hard to measure,

so I'm not sure I would ask you to measure the interval here just because it gets interrupted by the feedback on that.

The other beats sorry. By the other beats.

And so what do you think about the other beats.

Sometimes it comes off like the one sinus and through it. And sometimes you get one and sometimes you get two.

Yeah. Um, so like a multi channel.

Yeah. I don't know if there's really things where this exactly,

but when you have three together we call it a triplet and they're two together we call it a couple.

And then this little part is by Gemini just like we talked about before.

So I would usually say this is sinus rhythm ventricular triplets couplets and by jam.

Okay. And that kind of gives you an idea of what's what's happening there.

Um, and it sort of gives it away. But how do I know that these are ventricular beats?

There lived in a lawsuit for a year before, right?

I don't see two ways before them. There's also, like a little notch here on the end of the speed and the speed.

Which suggests that the P waves are maybe disassociated from those ventricular beats.

So that also is a little more evidence that they come from the ventricle and not from some other funny place.

So that little all the little bumps that that yeah, that the sharpness here, the sharpness here and this little bump here,

it's it's very hard to hang your hat on, but you can at least say that it's possible like here too.

There's a little bump. And those are maybe P waves.

Those are maybe P waves that are trying to do. Some of them might be retrograde, some of the ventricular beats,

and some of them might be the sinus that can't get through while the targets are coming.

And if you had to say something about where these were coming from, where do you think they might be?

The choices are from high up, heading low or from low heading high.

From high up. Heading low. Just like the sign of snow. Right. So they are probably coming from the outflow tract here.

Yeah. I wouldn't ask you to say.

It's a very common place that young people can get what we call idiopathic, because you have positive, mostly positive inflection in the right person.

2 or 3. Right. So but if you look at lead one it's like a negative peak.

So that implies like left to right. Yeah. So it's a little tricky.

So yeah there's funny stuff happening in the slides. You notice the cross doesn't have exactly the same direction for all three of those beads.

So you know how we were talking about some of those people that can go around the crease vessels when they get activated when it goes fast,

or sometimes there can be more activation on one side. So I can make the beads exit a little bit of malaise.

Yeah. But not not only important to watch, but the other thing that's important, and I probably would say in the description of this EKG,

is to say that there are no morphic in the sense that every single one of those beads looks like they're coming from the same,

because that has a very different implication than if every single one looks different,

has a different axis or, you know, length or probability depending on the patient.

And they're pressing hard. So what else is the question that you probably see.

Yeah. Because there's very little it's at the very least annoying even if it's not life threatening.

So there's something sorry, I think you just said this, but yeah. Is it coming from the mouth.

Are you coming from like just one? So it's so it's probably myocardium.

Um, can you say 100% for sure? You can say that for sure, but probably the only reason I say this,

which is another piece of information that you definitely need to have, is there's this.

See? This shows. It tells you a little bit about how high that this bundle is, which is where the natural conduction system starts.

If the q, R, s is significantly higher than that initially through an APF,

it's almost impossible for it from under his potential system at all, because there's no potential system on that high.

Because it's coming tied down to let's see how tall these are relative to the normal beats.

So that to me, that's the most convincing thing that it's coming from my cardigan from not from any kind of conduction tissue.

So I'm just a little bit confused because before every triplet or couplet, um, there's a it looks like there's a p wave, right?

Um, do you mean this thing? Yes, exactly. Yeah.

So this is the T wave that goes with the previous class.

Yeah. So that's very important that you said that because that's like an important thing.

People get tricked when they read them. And it's tricky because E2 has more of that kind of p wave look to it.

But if you look at the simultaneous means, if you come up here like here, it sort of looks more like a T way.

I think when you're trying to figure out what stuff is, it's helpful to go up and see, like what does it look like the other it's like up here.

It also looks like a T way, but it's very, very common to get to be confused as to what it is.

And there are certain EKGs where you can't even tell which one is supposed to be which.

But cheering us just kind of. Like with wave at this time.

So, um, this is the last one who wants to be left.

Um. So slow. Yes. Probably like this for years.

Yeah. Yeah, I would suspect, um, looks pretty signs.

So if I look into, um, q r s looks something that I see or I'm on one of them, I see if you the next one, I don't really, uh.

What does that mean if it's a good question.

So that go down to the rhythm strip and see if you can tell that from the rhythm strip.

Yeah. So I'm one of them, I see it the next one I don't, the next three I see.

