[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
All right. Good morning. Thank you.

Um, familiar faces in unfamiliar places, but welcome.

I think this might be one of the only lectures, so very few that you have in the MIT campus where you actually have a window,

because when you take repro next year, I think it's going to be across the courtyard on the third floor of that building,

one which also does not have any windows.

So HSC manages to focus your entire attention to the electrifying lectures that will be delivered day to day to you.

Right. Okay. So today you can look out the window. Um, uh, few people are sick, including your intrepid ta.

Rachel. So I will be passing around this thing today. Colin is traveling.

Uh, the food should be arriving here. But if you guys over here see someone poking their head in,

wondering whether they can come in and they have a bunch of food, just wave them in, right?

To tell them they can put it up here. We will not interrupt the lecture, but we do want to have our food, right?

We don't want to leave it on the hallways for the hungry undergraduates to come like the locusts.

Okay. Um, yes.

Today's lecture. So, um.

We put it all together, and, uh, if you wish,

and if you're so inclined to compare the lectures that are presented to you to a symphony, today is the grand finale, right?

The first lecture, sort of the like. Peace that flows and ebbs a little bit easy to listen to.

Second lecture equally third lecture, venous return curve.

There's always a piece in the middle that you feel like I don't quite know what to do with that.

Right. Maybe a little disharmony, maybe a little fast, maybe a little slow.

Right. Today, even the dude long haired dude, you know, in the percussion with a triangle is going to get up at the end.

It's banging this thing, right? So as you will see, there will be a groundswell.

It will be unmistakable. All right. So today we'll have a brief review of the venous return curve and the ventricular output curve.

Or output characteristics that we've, um, covered in the last two lectures.

Then we have to talk a little bit about the pulmonary vasculature and some peculiarities of the

pulmonary vasculature that you might have already covered a little bit in your respiratory class.

If not, then we'll cover it first. They will cover it last second.

Um, but you will hear probably at least twice. And then we would put it all together and we'll end with some clinical examples.

Right. This will be it for hemodynamics and cardiac mechanics or cardiovascular mechanics.

Next lecture I think will already transition to electrophysiology.

We are progressing at a breakneck speed in order to be able to cover all the material that we need to cover.

So at the end of this lecture, it's a good point to take a pulse to see whether this material is solidifying.

You have a chance to do that. You know, we do that together when we talk about the clinical examples,

but you also have a chance to do that in the current problem set that's out to on Thursday.

And then the next problem set I will put out where we also cover the material that we're covering today okay.

But we are progressing rather rapidly. And if you're not fine, if you fall behind a little bit, maybe on your reading it's a good time to catch up.

Okay. Because we switch gears on Thursday and we'll talk about electrocardiogram or electrophysiology.

All right. So with that, a brief review of the peripheral circulation and not the hardware, the isolated ventricle.

So this by now is second nature, right.

What we're showing here is the model of the peripheral circulation.

And as I said don't be intimidated at all by the circuit elements.

You can phrase this in terms of fluid mechanics.

Mechanical engineering analogs we're using here the language or the graphical representation of electrical circuits.

Resistance is resistance to blood flow. We defined the perfusion pressure as the upstream pressure minus the downstream pressure right.

And the flow through this is the upstream pressure minus the downstream pressure over the resistance.

These elements over here. Simply the rubbery, elastic properties of vascular segment.

They can stretch if the internal pressure is larger than the external pressure.

So if the trends mural pressure, the pressure across the vascular wall or across the ventricular wall is positive, right?

They distend they distend like a birthday balloon, right?

You push an internal pressure larger than external pressure.

The wall is elastic up to a certain limit.

It will expand. That is simply represented here by this.

Element outside pressure so far is we've we've always assumed that this is atmospheric pressure or reference pressure,

what we call here, the ground, which is zero tissue pressure with exceptions, is essentially zero is zero.

Uh, atmospheric is atmospheric pressure can change.

Of course, when we have edema, for example, in the peripheral circulation. We talked about that talk about pulmonary edema also today.

Right. Now the same. Vascular representation.

Lung vascular representation over here. Elasticity of the veins and a tiny resistance to units return.

So far we've defined the filling pressure as the mean right atrial pressure with reference to atmosphere.

We'll talk about intra thoracic pressure today in the lecture when we talk about the

heart lung pumping unit and the closed chest arrangement of the heart lung pumping unit.

Now, the characteristic that we did and I will not go into the details anymore other

than to say that this is our graphical representation of the venous return curve.

Here is our independent variable, the filling pressure which is the downstream pressure.

The dependent variables are cardiac output. Everything else depends on parameters of the peripheral circulation.

Systemic circulation. Resistance, microvascular resistance, RA rv resistance to venous return,

the compliances of the arterial systemic arteries of the compliance of the um.

Uh systemic veins mean systemic pressure defined as total descending wall blood volume over total compliance total the standing blood volume.

The standing means pressure is being generated, meaning total volume minus total zero pressure filling volume of the arteries and veins.

Okay, that is it. That's it, right?

The slope is given by this expression that we derived, you know, in classes also in your notes.

And if you are interested in the algebraic solution here we have a pressure

difference where the mean systemic pressure plays the role of the upstream pressure,

the filling pressure, the downstream pressure. This is a constant.

Right. If the numerator and the denominator is a constant and then over sum weighted sum of the resistances of the circuit.

Vascular collapse entering the thorax.

Over here. We've also shown this picture in the closed chest arrangement right when the chest is closed.

The intra thoracic pressure, also known as pleural pressure, is negative,

which means that even if the internal pressure here in the right atrium is zero with reference to atmosphere.

The trans mural pressure is zero minus approximately -four millimeters of mercury.

So the trans more pressure here is positive. Where does the vascular collapse occur?

At the entry points into the thorax where the tissue pressure external pressure might be zero over here might be zero over here.

And the internal pressure might become slightly negative.

The moment this turns more pressure becomes negative. The superior inferior cable in any other venous structure entering blood into the thorax,

right collapses and goes into a state of flow limitation, which is not a constant collapse,

meaning it doesn't go to zero,

but it's established essentially by the upstream pressure minus the outside pressure becomes independent of the downstream pressure.

All right. Okay. We played around with the parameters and we said, well, what happens if we change the mean systemic pressure?

The slope doesn't change, right? Because the mean systemic pressure, the vascular volume doesn't change in here.

Now, if we change the compliance, if we affect the change in mean systemic pressure by affecting the compliance,

then it will be both the slope and the offset that changes.

But by and large, as we will see when we talk about the control of the cardiovascular system.

The compliances of the lumped compliance. The overall compliance of the arterial systemic tree and the venous system.

Lump compliance, even under smooth muscle contraction, actually stay fairly constant.

Right. The filling status of the veins might change, the vascular resistance might change,

but the overall compliance of the systemic arteries and the systemic veins as a whole stay stay approximately constant.

So. Therefore, we always think of the changes in mean systemic pressure, the changing either in total blood volume, transfusion or hemorrhage.

Right, or a change in the zero pressure feeling volume through the vasomotor tone of the veins.

So no change in slope, but change in the offset.

Right. And what you can see over here is just even a minor change,

let's say from PMS from in systemic pressure of seven to maybe eight to maybe nine or so can change.

You know where we might be operating? Quite substantially.

All right. We'll talk more about this, too. It's the latter half of the course of today's lecture.

Okay. So PMS changes the offset, right?

Primarily mediated through changes in volume or total volume of zero pressure filling volume.

If we change another important variable which is resistance.

RA or RV don't enter into PMS.

Right. So it's really just the slope that changes. And the and RV is also essentially constant over here.

So all of that resistance is mediated by the microvascular resistance where we have that

industrial strength vascular smooth muscle in these pre capillary sphincter muscles.

You know, precalculus ahead of the, you know, upstream of the capillary vessels to bring that mean a ton of pressure down.

Okay. No change in the offset over here.

But a significant change in the resistance. Okay so much, I think for the re review of the venous return.

And you have an opportunity to exercise that in the in the problem set.

This is an important. Slide.

As I pointed out previously, to understand the behavior of the single ventricle or the muscle fiber.

What we said over here is that when we passively if you take a muscle fiber out of the heart, we passively stretch it.

It behaves like a rubber, right?

A little bit more tension or, you know, pulling on it to a certain length produces a little bit more tension, or we apply a little bit more tension.

It extends to a certain length. Right.

This is this passive behavior. It's just a rubber band.

Right. Now once we stimulate. Either at constant length.

Or against the constant load, the peak active pressure that's being generated.

Collapses on what we will call this end systolic.

Pressure volume relationship, in this case the length tension relationship.

Write the points don't fall onto two curves.

Whether you do it at constant force or you do it at constant length.

Right. It's one characteristic curve that is being generated.

The peak active tension. Now the more I stretch.

Or the more preload I provide to the muscle fiber, the higher the peak pressure or tension that's being generated.

Right. Well, think about this. Let's say you have a little bit of more venous return to the heart, right?

For whatever reason. A little bit of more venous return to the heart will stretch the muscle fibers a little bit more,

meaning that the next contraction will actually be a little bit more forceful.

Meaning that it can actually give out a little bit more volume.

Of stroke of stroke volume right in the neck speed, thereby returning the heart to its normal filling status.

So even without any neural feedback, without, you know, any,

any sensors that have to go through some neural pathways to figure out how high the blood

pressure or how high the cardiac output ought to be intrinsic in this relationship,

that more within limits, more preload gives you a higher active tension that's being generated,

means that there is an intrinsic regulatory process of the heart that can deal with volume that's too low.

Right of filling one in. That's too high. Okay.

Also has implications that we will see for, um.

Uh, close chest operation of the heart when we have an inter thoracic pressure that's, uh, non-zero.

Okay. What this allowed us to do, to say, hey, listen, this is cool, right?

Because. It almost looks like this little fiber that we have can be modeled as a two state spring.

It's either in a floppy state. When it's passive or it's in a stiff state when it's active.

Right. And we made the transition from there to the model of the ventricle where the, the,

the the role of the of the length is now given by the role of the volume chamber volume.

And the role of the tension is played by the pressure.

And we said we operate between an end diastolic pressure volume relationship and systolic pressure volume relationship.

And all the dynamics happen in here. Because the ventricle, as you see over here, is essentially a receptacle.

It's a balloon that can take volume. Right.

We also model it as a capacitance, as a storage element essentially.

And that storage element can be in one of two states and transition between the two

states and diastolic or filling state and systolic state at the end of each action.

Okay. All right.

So far, I'm just repeating all the things that we've already said. But I want to bring all of this together.

Now, again, don't be intimidated.

What we have over here is simply a constant preload. It's a battery, right?

And we have a constant afterload.

That's exactly the kind of thing that we had last time with the two reservoirs, where one reservoir is feeding the other reservoir.

Look at the at the slides from last time. The diodes over here are simply unit directional flow devices.

These are all valves mitral valve, aortic valve, tricuspid valve, pulmonic valve.

And then we have our our cycling ventricle. Over here we made arguments that that cycling between the diastolic state high capacitance

state and the systolic state actually happens over very brief periods of time.

All right. We're spending most of our time, of course, in diastole.

Right? Two thirds of the cardiac cycle, approximately one third of the cardiac cycle, approximately insists ventricular systole.

Right. Including a contraction. But that transition between the end diastolic compliance and the necessary compliance happens fairly, fairly quickly.

And so in this configuration where we have a constant preload and constant afterload.

Right. Constant preload FX constant afterload PA our cardiac cycle is simply um defined by these four phases.

Phase four is filling. Phase one ice contraction until we reach the constant afterload.

Right at that point, aortic valve opens. We eject against the constant preload.

At the end of systole. Aortic valve closes.

I make relaxation until a mitral valve opens and the cycle repeats itself.

Okay. We have a dead volume or a zero pressure filling volume of the ventricle.

We assume that the zero pressure filling volume in systole and diastole are the same.

The difference between these two volume states is our stroke volume, right?

Simply defined as the end diastolic volume and systolic volume, where we've taken into account over here is that the dead volume is the same,

so that it drops out over here and over here in diastolic volume.

Technically this. Right and systolic volume ESV.

Technically this if you subtract the two, the dead volume drops out and we left with this.

Okay. We also defined the, um, ejection fraction.

Now we can use this formula. To define the ventricular output curve and I'm always walking over there.

I can also do this over here. So. This is our equation that we've just used.

Heart rate F times the entire solid filling the entire solid volume minus the and systolic volume.

Right. If you can see. Um, you might not be able to on the other side.

That's the nice thing about this guy. Right now.

If. The feeling pressure is such that we can.

Sorry. If if if the feeling pressure is such that we can.

Or the cardiac mechanical such that we can never reach the arterial pressure.

So the aortic valve never opens. Our ventricular output is zero, right.

Meaning that there's a combination of c s over CD times PA.

Right where we're not reaching the, um, aortic pressure.

The afterload. Now. CD ten.

So within the normal limit of behavior.

We have a linear relationship, or technically affine, but who cares?

Between the feeling pressure. Input pressure to the ventricle and the output.

Remember, on the venous return curve we had a linear relationship to within limits.

Between the downstream pressure and and the venous return. Here we have a linear relationship.

Between the filling pressure and the ventricular output.

Up until we reach the maximum filling volume of the ventricle, and we assume that there was really a hard wall that we hit, right.

And at that point, no matter how much. More.

We try to increase the feeling pressure. The ventricular output plateaus simply because the ventricle can feel more than that.

And that's when we end this regime three over here where the ventricular output is limited, not by time,

three, not by the filling pressure itself, but by the maximum pressure over by the maximum volume that the.

That the, um, the ventricle can take. I'll go back here.

This we talked about in the second lecture. Right ventricular left ventricular curve.

Left atrial curve. And. Aortic root pressure.

Right or arterial blood pressure. At the root of the order and we said mitral valve closure.

Aortic valve opening, peak systolic pressure. Aortic valve closure.

Mitral valve opening. Right between 1 and 2 ISO will limit contraction between 2 and 4.

We have ejection between 4 and 5. We have relaxation between five and the next one we have filling.

Now we can transition from the pressure versus time axis over here to the pressure volume axis over here.

If we supply you with the corresponding ventricular volumes that.

Correspond to the individual points on the graph over here.

Likewise, if we give you this and we give you the timing information of this, at least we can reconstruct the ventricular pressure volume curve.

Right. Pressure over here.

Aortic valve opening. Also the diastolic. Arterial blood pressure.

Don't mistake the end. Diastolic pressure of the left ventricle with the end or the diastolic arterial blood pressure.

Two very different pressures. Right. This on the order of 5 to 8.

Normally this on the order of 80. Right.

That's why we always try to emphasize the ventricular end.

Diastolic pressure is the end of filling. Right.

And the arterial diastolic pressure is when just before the aortic valve opens.

Sometimes people get a little bit confused about that. We want to keep that separate.

All right. We talked about varying the preload and the afterload here.

Again we're in that constant preload constant afterload arrangement.

We increase the afterload meaning arterial blood pressure.

Stroke volume significantly reduces.

Ejection fraction significantly reduces. Few millimeters of mercury.

Of change. Increase in the feeling pressure can restore our cardiac output because CD is so large, the slope of one over CD therefore very shallow.

Normally right, very shallow. Just a few millimeters of mercury can make you move from here to here.

Right? So a lot of ability to regulate stroke volume quite substantially by just moving a few millimeters.

American pointed out that you have all that venous reservoir, right,

of your hepatic circulation of your splanchnic circulation of all these large

veins that have a lot of capacity sitting right upstream of the right atrium,

meaning if there is a little bit of smooth muscle contraction,

you can mobilize a lot of this dead volume and modulate that filling pressure quite substantially by just a few millimeters of mercury.

You can you can modulate cardiac output, uh, stroke volume, cardiac output quite substantially.

We talked about contractility. Um, increasing contractility makes the slope of the end systolic pressure volume relationships deeper.

Meaning if we're actually doing this. All other things being equal, we substantially increase stroke volume.

If we're reducing the contractility, right, we make it substantially larger.

So modulation of the systolic pressure volume relationship.

Either in health, fight or flight response as we will see.

Right? Or you getting on a treadmill and you starting to exercise right.

Your contractility will go up. Right will increase.

Someone has a heart attack, or you just had your big Thanksgiving meal and you are in postprandial coma, right?

You're going to the couch, you're lying down, you have the rest and digest response the opposite of the flight and fight or flight response.

Contractility is going down okay. These are neurally mediated pathways.

We talked about the fact that the, um, diastolic relaxation is a oxygen dependent mechanism.

So if your heart is in an oxygen deprived state, you are, um, also not just changing the contractility,

but also what is known as the lucid tropic state of the heart, meaning the efficiency and the rate with which the heart can actually contract.

And that has to do with the calcium re uptake into the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

So if you have a heart attack, your end systolic pressure volume relationship will go down and your end diastolic pressure relationship will go up.

The effect of this is a significantly increased.

Feeling pressure. Right, and it's significantly reduced stroke volume, as we'll see in one of the clinical examples that I'll show at the end.

All right. I think this is all by way of review,

but I wanted all of us to have this at the tip of our fingers before we now transition to the function of the integrated cardiovascular system.

The horns are playing. The trumpets are getting ready. Right? Uh, even the violas, uh, you know, starting to move.

So we're getting there. So coming back to the very first lecture, what is the function of the cardiovascular system?

First and foremost, to supply the brain with oxygen.

Right now, if it's not the brain, it's the heart.

Without the heart, no brain. Right. Without the brain, no control.

Right. So but first and foremost, perfused the CNS with oxygenated blood to your liver can be shot.

Your kidneys are gone. Multi-Organ failure.

Your heart is still trying to pump blood to the brain. That's it.

There's other mechanisms over here that all have to do with one way or another,

with perfusion meaning pushing blood around the vasculature in adequate rates.

Right. Transport over here. Nutrients, waste products.

Pick up communication. Heat exchange protection.

Maybe not so much, but yeah, you also have to get to the wound and you have to release your, um, stuff.

Okay. What determines cardiac output? In the intact circulation.

Sorry. Yes. So. Interesting.

Cardiac output. It's heart rate.

Time. Stroke volume. Self-evident.

Right. You put that on the board. The first lecture. So.

If I were to pace you or an animal in front of us.

And they were to double the heart rate. I would double the stroke for.

Oh, sorry. I would double the cardiac output. We all agree.

All right, hold that thought. It's the pump, of course.

What determines cardiac output? Right for.

You have that big muscle sitting there. Right. What we said.

Is that we pretty much have an infinite reservoir almost sitting right at the entrance to the right ventricle.

Cardiac output is what the heart can push out, what the heart can pump,

and therefore cardiac output is limited only by the ability of the heart to pump.

Makes sense. Right. So if you're in that camp, if you were to go to a conference.

Decades ago, cardiovascular physiology, let's say 60 or 70 years ago, you would have a huge following.

But you would be yelled at by the other half of the people in the audience.

Why? It makes so much sense, right?

We've built it up that way. However. Increasing heart rate.

Only minimally increases cardiac output. How is that possible?

Heart rate. Cardiac output is heart rate times. Cardiac times.

Stroke line. Self-evident. Well, if I measure your heart rate and if I measure your cardiac output.

If I measure your heart rate in a measure of your stroke volume, that is your cardiac output.

And then a pace. The measure heart rate and measure stroke one.

You know, heart rate. You know, cardiac output. So what's the problem here?

Nope. Stroke volume is not in the intact circulation.

Stroke volume is not independent of heart rate.

So if I if if I measure the stroke volume and I measure the heart rate, I can multiply that to and by definition that is your cardiac output.

Right. But it's a fallacy to say a double heart rate, therefore a double cardiac output, because stroke volume is no longer independent of heart rate.

Okay. Replacing the heart with a pump of nearly infinite capacity increases cardiac output very little.

Increasing blood volume in that reservoir.

Can change cardiac output near instantaneously, meaning I raise that reservoir just a tiny bit.

Cardiac output jumps up instantaneously.

Changes in total peripheral resistance. Significant, I should say.

Changes in total peripheral resistance, as we will see, can dramatically change cardiac output.

For example, we've already talked about an AV fistula right.

So a big short circuit. Between.

The main artery and the main vein, or if you have a stab wound at a place, for example,

the groin, where a large artery and a large vein go right next to each other.

And it just happens that the knife is between the two of them. So they actually, you know, lacerate both.

And there's a big there's a big, um, short circuit.

Right? Has nothing to do with the heart has all to do with the peripheral circulation.

Right. Changes cardiac output dramatically as we will see.

Okay. So something is not right. So you are at that conference right.

And you are in the left half of the room in the blue corner.

And then who is in the red corner. Right. Who are the people who are yelling at you that you are wrong?

The people who believe in the peripheral resistance or the peripheral concept.

Meaning that we know that the vessels feeding the heart.

A collapsible. Right.

Same for the inferior cava. So the heart can only pump out what the peripheral circulation gives.

It gives it back. So, in fact.

It's a peripheral circulation and the behavior of the peripheral circulation.

That determines cardiac output. Make sense?

The way that we've built it up. Right. However.

When tremendous amounts of blood are allowed to return to the heart, a limit in cardiac output is eventually reached.

Right. Meaning if you take the. If we take the the if we get rid of that vascular collapse.

Right. We cannot increase cardiac output ad infinitum.

And the heart is compromised. Cardiac output always decreases irrespective of what the peripheral circulation gives it back.

And recovery from cardiac failure always leads to an increase in cardiac output,

meaning that we don't change anything on the side of the peripheral circulation.

Right. The heart is allowed to recover.

We get cardiac output back. So how do we reconcile all of this now that I've confused you thoroughly?

Hopefully, right now comes the big resolution, right?

Thesis. Antithesis. Synthesis. So here's our block diagram.

Right. Right heart. Pulmonary circulation.

Left heart. We've talked about this. We've talked about this in isolation.

We talked about that in isolation. Doesn't matter whether we use the perspective of the right heart or the left heart.

Right. Let's talk about the function.

The intact function of the heart lung pumping unit. Here.

And in order to do that, let's represent this first in terms of our circuit diagrams.

And then we'll talk about the pulmonary circulation.

So. Nothing is new here.

It just looks ugly. Okay. Right heart.

Exactly what we had before. Wealth going in.

Wealth going out. Time varying capacitance on the right side of the heart.

Same looks on the left side.

Valve going in. Valve going out. Time bearing balloon over here.

Right. This also looks very familiar. Right.

An arterial capacitor, a microvascular resistance venous capacitor,

and resistance to venous return is exactly the same circuit representation that we had for the peripheral circulation.

Only applied to the pulmonary circulation.

Okay. So let's look at the function of this.

Block over here. The pulmonary vasculature. Let me let me make a few arguments for you about the peculiar behavior of the pulmonary vasculature.

First, what does it look like? Well, it looks like on the left, if you have a radiograph where you have put some dye in here, radial pink dye,

you have that very fine aberration that travels along the bifurcations of the respiratory system sort of bronchi various generations.

Right. Once you get down to the individual alveoli you have a network.

Of capillary vessels that engulf essentially each individual alveolus.

Right. And you have the arteries and veins here going in close up position.

And you have a very delicate structure.

Right. The alveolar wall very thin so that diffusive processes can happen very quickly.

We said that diffusion that that oxygen uptake and CO2 removal is perfusion limited.

So in 0.25 seconds or so right.

The diffusive equilibrium is established when the transit time of an erythrocyte

or of any blood cell through the pulmonary microvascular shows 0.7521 seconds.

So we have triple quadruple redundancy here. Right.

So very fragile. Uh, tissue at the level of the alveolus and very, very thin walled structures of the pulmonary capillary.

Right. Individual, um individual alveolar.

So individual endothelial cells. Not much connective tissue, not much.

You know, uh, structure, uh, support structure to keep these open.

Right. As I'm standing here and as you are sitting here, your heart somewhere over here.

Right? Now there's a part of the lung that is below the level of the heart.

There's a part of the lung that's above the level of the heart.

And as with the vessels that return blood to the heart, we have three pressures to take care to, to keep track of.

We have the upstream pressure. Right. We have the downstream pressure.

And we have the outside pressure, which in this case is alveolar pressure, right.

This here is lung. This here is capillary.

Right. Arterial pressure.

Venous pressure. Outside pressure. Now, if my right ventricle is generating a certain pulmonary arterial pressure PPA.

And that go against gravity. The hydrostatic hydrostatic pressure that I measure above, the level of the heart is reduced.

By the water column. That I'm supporting over here.

Meaning that pressure here is higher than this pressure over here,

simply because the weight of this water column adds to the hydrostatic pressure that's generated by the heart.

Does it make sense? Okay. Hydrostatic.

That means that the pressure over here, arterial side is higher than the pressure over here is higher than the pressure over here,

and it's higher than the pressure over here. Right now, the perfusion pressure doesn't much change because the same holds true over here.

The pulmonary venous pressure over here is higher than over here higher than over here higher than over here.

And if this column is communicating it's exactly the same hydrostatic level.

Meaning that the road here on this side and on this side cancel out.

Right. But what? Is reduced.

But reduced, as you can see, as indicated by the, you know, width of these pathways is it trends from the oil pressure.

Right? Because this pressure over here is higher than this.

Pressure over here is higher than this pressure over here is higher than this pressure over here.

Right. Which means that the vascular distention towards the base of the lung is higher to then towards the APC's.

Can you even get to the point where the blood flow through the apex of your of your lungs is might be, might be zero because of collapse?

And this might be static collapse. Right. So if, if it goes up too high over here.

Right. This pressure over here might drop below the outside pressure.

And this pathway is collapsed. All right.

So because the vascular walls are flimsy, right?

Because you're exposed to the atmospheric pressure as an outside pressure and because you're

actually moving against gravity if you're standing up in the in the gravitational field.

Let's assume for a second that your pulmonary arterial pressure.

Right goes up. Because there's a transient increase in venous return.

All right. How can the pulmonary vasculature react to it passively?

Just biomechanically right. If this pressure goes up.

Right. The pressure here goes up, the pressure here goes up, the pressure he goes up.

The pressure here goes up. Right. What can happen is that you're actually popping open parallel pathways, increased recruitment of parallel pathways.

If the pressure is if the left if the right ventricular pressure, pulmonary artery pressure are going up.

Right. Likewise, if this pressure is going up, it can also lead to increased tension.

Right. Because now this pressure is higher. The luminal pressure luminal intra luminal inside pressure is getting higher.

At the same outside pressure you're descending the vasculature a tiny bit more.

You have more lower resistance. You can actually push more blood flow through.

Right. So there is a dual effect if the pressure goes up.

If this were a static resistance this pressure goes up.

The downstream pressure stays the same. The perfusion pressure would increase.

You're pushing more flow through. But what I said is a dual effect, increased pressure.

Over here you recruit more parallel pathways and you distend more pathways that already exist.

The resistance goes down. Right. You recruit more parallel pathways.

Meaning that your resistance is going down and the already established pathways also reduce the resistance because the luminal distention goes down.

So your driving pressure goes up. And your resistance goes down.

What's happens to flow? It goes up even more.

Okay. Meaning that the resistance to blood flow through the pulmonary circulation.

Is not constant. On the systemic side.

We said that this ray peripheral vascular resistance, microvascular resistance,

we dumped it into a single resistance that we assume constant without any neural influences.

Okay. That is not the case for the pulmonary, uh, vasculature.

As a matter of fact, here we see this is the pulmonary vascular resistance PVR.

And this is the upstream pressure the pulmonary arterial pressure.

Right. If the vascular resistance were constant.

That graph would look like this. Independent of the upstream pressure.

Independent of the downstream pressure. But what is kind of a mean pulmonary arterial pressure?

Maybe around 15mm of mercury or something around that. Maybe ten.

Right. But what you see over here, if you're changing.

Increasing the downstream pressure. That.

Resistance is going down. Increased downstream pressure leads to increased distention.

Right. Or if we increase the upstream pressure, the resistance also goes down.

Okay. So highly nonlinear, the pulmonary vascular resistance as a function of the downstream pressure, and as a function of the upstream pressure.

Exactly and precisely because of that recruitment of parallel pathways and because of the distention of already existing pathways.

All right. So this is a change in pressure over the flow also resistance.

So this is simulation. This is actual data right.

Once you go to a certain limit when everything is popped open and everything is distended you're plateauing off.

But once you are actually operating in the normal regime of mean pulmonary artery pressure,

you see that that sort of curvy linearity of that characteristic kicks in, right?

And is also dependent on the left atrial pressure quite substantially, actually.

All right. So in other words.

The non-linearity. All right. Okay, let me let me help the guy.

You're eagerly awaited. Oh. Come in. There's a table over here.

All right. Good job. So.

What does this. Yeah, we can help.

Please do. So what does this imply? So maybe I should stop here.

All the eyes are on the food. One more slide, please.

So what does this imply? Right. Any fluctuation?

If you stay with me for this slide, you really earn your bagel. All right. So let's see here.

Any increase? In the pulmonary artery.

Pressure over here is will be self-limiting in the sense that if this goes up over here.

This resistance goes down to the trench, the perfusion pressure goes up.

So you have an increase in flow through here.

But the resistance also goes down, which even has a further effect of increasing flow through the pulmonary vasculature.

Meaning this increase over here is self-limiting in the sense that to first order approximation,

the assumption that we can make is under normal operating conditions.

The pulmonary arterial pressure. The afterload of the right ventricle is approximately constant.

And it has all to do with the fact of that non-linearity of the pulmonary vascular resistance.

Which means that our cardiac output curve.

Cardiac output curve is given by the frequency.

Heart rate filling pressure times the end diastolic compliance of the right ventricle.

Minus. The end systolic compliance of the right ventricle.

Times the pulmonary artery pressure. So in terms of, you know, the trumpets are going the even the double basses are, you know, throwing away.

Right. The guy with the timpani is doing this. Right.

And as I said, the long haired dude with the triangle is standing right because his big finale is coming.

What might seem like a sleight of hand over here, right, is that I've replaced.

The ventricular output of the right ventricle.

With the cardiac output, which is the output of the heart lung pumping unit.

And what I'm saying is, if and as long as we can make this assumption, which is good for a wide range of physiological conditions.

Then we can forget about the dynamics of the downstream pulmonary vascular pulmonary vasculature.

We can assume the pulmonary artery, the afterload of the right ventricle to be constant,

and the heart lung, the output of the heart lung pumping unit only dependent.

On the filling of the right ventricle. Against the constant afterload of the pulmonary circulation.

All right. Thank you.

This is the equivalent of someone sneezing right at the middle of the grand finale of the of the of the symphony.

Right. So the point here is the following.

The left ventricle. Is the one with the thick myocardium.

Industry strength pump. The right ventricle.

Is that flimsy? Appendage, almost the shell that sits, you know, right around wraps around the left ventricle.

And what I'm telling you here is the output of the heart lung pumping unit.

Is determined under normal conditions. By the performance of the right ventricle.

Not by the performance of the left ventricle.

Think of the right ventricle as a booster pump, as a preamplifier, as something that brings the signal up to a certain level,

and the left ventricle as the industry strength pump that can pump anything that the right ventricle gives it.

Right. So. When Doctor Staats teaches this lecture.

He says, think of Arnold Schwarzenegger circa Terminator two, right, and Pee-Wee Herman.

Right. And they actually passing a bucket of water, which is a pump.

Right. Do you think it's Arnold or Pee-Wee Herman that limits the flow of water?

It's not Arnold. Right under normal circumstances.

It's the right ventricle. That limits cardiac output.

Right because of the assumption of because of the non-linearity.

You can make the assumption that the pulmonary arterial pressure is constant.

All right. You've earned your bagels. We'll come back and we'll put it all together.

All right. Let's continue.

We had very good questions and very good discussions during the break. So let me go over some of the things again.

But. Okay, so let me get go over this again and let me make sure that at least at this stage, we understand.

If pulmonary vascular resistance were constant, it would be a horizontal line in this graph, right?

It would be independent of the upstream pressure and independent of the downstream pressure.

That's a constant resistance, right?

That is not the case because of the distension or parallel the distension and the recruitment of parallel pathways.

Right. The total resistance, or one over the total resistance of parallel pathways,

is the sum of the individual parallel one over the individual parallel resistances.

So the more resistance is, the larger the and over here the lower the resistance.

Okay. And the more that we descend, the lower the resistance.

I said I make very sparing reference to the hog and possibly law of resistance being proportional to one over radius to the fourth.

Here is one of those exceptions. Right?

As you distend. As you descend, the resistance goes down.

Right. So meaning that as the upstream pressure.

Let's focus on the upstream pressure.

As the upstream pressure goes up, because of the increased recruitment, because of the distension, the pulmonary vascular resistance goes down.

What is this? What is the functional consequence of this?

The functional consequence of this is this. Assume this.

Resistance where? Constant. If this upstream pressure goes up, this downstream pressure remains constant.

The flow through here would go up simply because the perfusion pressure goes up.

Right. So far, so good. But this is not constant.

Meaning that as this pressure is going up.

Flow is going up because of the increased perfusion pressure, but the flow is going up even further because the resistance is going down.

Right. That's what this is showing over here. No, this is what this is showing over here.

Pressure going up. Resistance going down. Right.

What happens if you start at a nominal pulmonary artery pressure P0 right P0 over here PA zero.

Pulmonary artery pressure. Let's say your body likes to operate at this point over here.

And let's say for whatever reason the right ventricle is giving out a little bit more when stroke volume.

Right. All other things being equal. You're moving to a new point over here, right?

Your pulmonary artery pressure is going up because all other things being equal.

Your pulmonary artery pressure is going up because more stroke volume has been given out by the right atrium.

Right ventricle. But that leads biomechanically passive.

To a decrease in the pulmonary vascular resistance,

meaning increased flow through the peripheral to the pulmonary vasculature, which means that you're moving back.

Towards this point. What happens if you overshoot and you find yourself on this side of the nominal pulmonary arterial pressure?

Now the upstream pressure has gone down.

So the perfusion pressure has gone down. So the reduced flow and your vascular resistance is higher.

So, leading to a further reduction in flow compared to normal.

Meaning that if you find yourself on this side of the pulmonary artery pressure.

The non-linearity of the pulmonary arterial, the pulmonary vasculature would bring you back towards the nominal operating point.

So it's essentially a self-regulating process. Meaning that within certain limits.

And we'll talk about where it might break down.

The pulmonary arterial pressure can be assumed to be constant.

The pulmonary arterial pressure is assumed to be constant.

But back in this regime, what we had with the two beakers, right, a constant preload, a constant afterload.

Here we don't have a constant preload because whatever the peripheral circulation is giving us back that that's what determines the filling pressure,

right. But we have a constant afterload. We assume that pulmonary arterial pressure is constant.

Right. Because of the non-linearity of the pulmonary vascular.

Pulmonary vasculature. Now if this is constant, then the right ventricle doesn't care about anything that is further downstream.

All it sees is a constant afterload. Right.

So it gives out what it gives out, right? It gives out what the preload and the diastolic pressure volume relationship of

the right ventricle determines the enter starting moment Historic pressures to be.

Right. In steady state. The left ventricle pumps out what the right ventricle gives it.

Right. It's a definition of steady state. That can be transient phenomena where that is not the case.

But all of this is predicated on steady state. Right.

So if the right ventricle gives out a little bit more of stroke volume.

Right. The end diastolic volume and the internal solid pressure of the left ventricle will go up a little bit.

If that goes up a little bit, these myocytes tracks are a little bit more.

These tracks are a little bit more. The pressure that they can generate, peak pressure goes up.

So with the next stroke of the left ventricle, the left ventricle gives out a slightly higher stroke far.

Right. But it can only give out what the right ventricle gives it.

So in a normal circumstances, it's the right ventricle, the flimsier of the two chambers.

That determines cardiac output. That makes sense.

Okay. That's why I said maybe it looks like a sleight of hand over here because I've just replaced ventricular output.

By cardiac output and the. Pulmonary artery pressure with a constant.

Pulmonary artery pressure. But it all relies on the non-linearity of the pulmonary vasculature.

And the fact that if you find yourself on either side of this.

The biophysics of this non-linearity is such that you would come back.

To the normal operating point. Okay. So.

The right ventricle. Cancel. Yes. Uh, yes, we had that question during the break as well.

What's the physiological reason? What's the you know, we can talk about it, but in the end.

Right. What? God. In her infinite wisdom.

Right. Created. Who am I?

To understand. I have no idea. Right. You can. You can come up with with with teleological reasons.

Right? It's it's very flimsy circulation. Right.

It might not have much dynamic range on the level of the pulmonary capillary.

Right. What do I know?

Not much. I don't even know why. The tricuspid valve has three casts on the right side, right?

And two cuts on the left. It bothers me for the heck of me.

Right where the high pressure is on the left side,

where you think that the pressure or the force per unit leaflet would be lower on the left side than on the right side.

Why is that happening? Sorry.

That's a different story. That's a different story.

I tried. Nobody enlightened me.

Maybe it'll come back to cardiovascular physiology.

The right ventricle can still saturate. Right.

So we still have a maximum elastic limit that might saturate over here.

So the maximum cardiac output all other things being equal if we get to high filling

pressures right is still the maximum filling capacity of the right ventricle.

Does look right. It's going limit faster than.

Very good question. Very good question.

Yes it does. Right. However. It's related to this.

Um, yes it does. In.

Can the left ventricle ever be limiting? Right.

Uh, the answer is yes. So here we are on the left ventricular side.

So once you actually go up to 30mm of mercury.

Right. The left ventricle, sort of the curvy linearity of the left ventricle and diastolic pressure volume relationship becomes high.

Um. However. And here's what your question to be addressed is.

Um, there is a functional limit that we'll get to in a minute.

Right. So. Left ventricular output curve.

Exactly the same as the right ventricular output for a way back to the ventricular output curve zero.

Under certain circumstances, you have a linear portion over here the preload is the left atrial pressure.

Preload to the left ventricle is the left atrial pressure.

Afterload. Arterial pressure. Right.

The left ventricle also has a maximum filling pressure of filling volume right.

As we said, that is usually not reached until 30 40mm of mercury.

But there's a functional limit that limits us beforehand.

And that is what we call the pulmonary edema threshold.

If the left atrial pressure gets too high, the downstream pressure.

To pulmonary blood flow gets to high. Which means that you're entering a state of pulmonary edema the same way that we had peripheral edema.

If the downstream pressure hydrostatic pressure is getting too large,

you're starting to extract as a plasma fluid into the interstitium or, you know, fluid into the interstitium.

You're getting into a state of pulmonary edema. Reduced oxygenation.

It's a functional limit rather than a mechanical limit of the left ventricle.

And that's when all of the assumptions that we're making about PPA being constant and these kinds of things, you know, go out the window.

Okay. All right. Um.

The, uh, the afterload of the heart lung pumping unit is the arterial pressure.

Right afterload of the right ventricle is the constant pulmonary artery pressure.

But the heart lung pumping unit the preload is the filling pressure.

The afterload is the arterial pressure. And here is the question can the afterload ever become limiting?

Is. If you look at this last equation that we had over here, right.

Cardiac output Vmax of the left ventricle minus the systolic compliance of the left ring times the arterial pressure.

We have now the afterload on the x axis. And we have the cardiac output on the y axis.

Right. So we are asking ourselves the question,

what is the upper limit of left ventricular cardiac output as a function of the afterload of the heart lung pumping unit?

Right. I said that whatever the right ventricle gives it, the. Left ventricle can pump out.

To within limits. So this line over here is just.

This functional relationship, right? If arterial blood pressure is zero.

Then the cardiac output is F times Vmax. Right.

If par is Vmax over kz.

Then we have zero cardiac output, right? So this is just the left ventricle.

Maximum filling of the left ventricle, limiting cardiac output.

If we're in a state of reduced left ventricular contractility, X being impaired, right, that end systolic pressure volume relationship coming down.

This manifests itself as a reduction. Over here.

Right. So where do we usually operate?

Let's assume this is the right ventricular output, right?

The right ventricle is just putting out something that we are representing over here.

Right. And we are then changing the arterial blood pressure.

Right. The left ventricle. Can put all of this out and then some.

Until we hit this curve over here.

Right. So over this range of arterial blood pressure, of afterload of the heart lung pumping unit.

It's the right ventricle that limits performance. Right.

Once we hit this point over here, then it becomes the left ventricle.

That limits the performance. Right. So there is a dependance on afterload.

So the left ventricle is not an infinite pump.

Right. And of course, if we have a heart attack.

This left ventricular function can impair and can encroach on what the right ventricle gives out.

So assuming that it's a left ventricular wall infarct for example. Right.

Because now this, that this, the compliance is reduced.

And you're hitting that intersection point earlier. Right.

But over a comparatively large range of arterial blood pressures, the hard lung pumping unit can actually pump, um, in a load independent manner.

Right. Load independent means that I don't care what against what I have to pump.

What? But eventually even our myocytes, you know, will not be able to do that anymore.

Okay. So then we operate in three regimes.

The normal regime where the right heart establishes the cardiac output.

Right. The feeling pressure is such that we haven't reached the right ventricular maximum filling volume.

Left ventricle is not in failure, and we assume that we have right ventricular constant right ventricular afterload.

PA zero is approximately equal to constant.

That means that our cardiac output output of the heart lung pumping unit, the entire thing is given by the performance of the right atrium.

Right ventricle. Right. Region two.

The right ventricle saturates. We become independent of the filling pressure.

And the maximum right ventricular volume. Determines cardiac output.

Still independent of arterial blood pressure. Systemic arterial blood pressure.

Now in region three, when the left ventricle fails and limits, then the cardiac output is four times the maximum volume of the left ventricle,

minus the systolic compliance of the left ventricle times the afterload of the heart lung pumping unit with just PA.

So only in that region three that our heart lung pumping unit.

Is limited by the left ventricle and therefore becomes susceptible.

Two increases in. A systemic arterial blood pressure.

Okay. So this is a diagrammatic representation.

And you have that in your books in your in your notes.

Region one over here. Right. So mean arterial blood pressure mean right atrial pressure which is also what we call the filling pressure.

Right. And cardiac output. Region one.

The higher the mean right atrial pressure. The higher the cardiac output.

Until we're getting so large. That the right ventricle becomes limiting.

That's the plateau over here. Right.

Independent, reasonably independent of mean arterial pressure.

Look at this pressure here. This is simulation, of course, but.

But 30, 60, 9120. So this is minute to a pressure minute to relieve pressure 150 is still pretty much constant independent of mean arterial pressure.

Right. Until the pressures become so high.

That when you change the mean right atrial pressure, you're falling off that cliff.

Right. And then it's the left ventricle that becomes limiting in that region three.

Okay. We'll talk a lot more about that. Region three when we talk about heart failure.

All right. And. And myocardial infarction.

Side note. So far we've talked about.

The behavior. Of the heart lung pumping unit, where the outside pressure was essentially atmosphere, which I mentioned previously.

It's essentially an open chest configuration. Right.

But in the closed chest. Because in the open chest, what's the normal pressure in the open chest?

The transmitted pressure is the feeling pressure minus the outside pressure. Right.

And that's our atmospheric pressure. Now in the closed chest.

We do have an intra thoracic pressure that's negative.

Right. So this is the pressure that we're interested in.

Outside pressure is zero in the closed chest. There's a pressure difference from the body surface.

To the pleural space. Right. Any of those of you in HSC, what is it 100 have in respiratory physiology?

Have probably spent the last few weeks thinking about that. Right.

And that's what keeps the of course, what keeps the lungs open. Right.

What determines FRC functional residual capacity.

That's a question. Exactly right.

Thank you very much. Right. It's the tendency of the chest wall to expand.

Right. And the tendency of the lung tissue to, to, to, to to collapse.

Right. And if you have a space between those spaces, zone of apposition.

Right. If you have two forces that go in opposite direction, you eventually reach a limit.

And that limit sets up a negative intra thoracic pressure.

Right. So if we close the chest wall, the transmission pressure across the right atrium, left atrium, left ventricle.

The right ventricle is luminal pressure. Pressure inside minus intra thoracic pressure.

Right. So it's the filling pressure with reference to atmosphere minus the intra thoracic pressure or pleural pressure.

Right. So the way that you can model it if over here if you want you have a battery over here.

And that says that you have an additional negative pressure over here that says that it's not this pressure minus ground,

but it's this pressure minus this pressure over here. Right. What happens to our interest, our cardiac output curve when we substitute PV star for PV?

Well, it's just the translation. Of that curve.

Right, because at the same nominal pressure measured with reference to atmosphere, the negative pressure around it.

Pulls these myocytes a little bit more, right?

Because now, rather than having zero transmission pressure, you actually have a transplant pressure of negative four.

Right, and your vasculature is still open. Right.

So in the closed chest configuration,

the transmission pressure across the cardiac structures is the luminal pressure minus the intra thoracic pressure.

So there's usually and tidal breathing minus negative four ish millimeters of mercury.

So what that means. Is that our cardiac output curve doesn't go to zero over here or to zero over here, but it's shifted towards the left.

Meaning that at zero feeling pressure know measured with reference to atmosphere, we're actually not collapsed.

We are actually in a state where the heart is able to provide a cardiac output because of the negative transmission pressure.

And that has implications also for the way that we breathe.

Right. Many of us probably have never breathed negative against negative pressure.

Right. But some of us might have breathed, breathed against positive pressure.

Anybody has ever been ventilated. Hopefully not.

But how many scuba divers do we have? Huh?

Maybe a half dozen. Right. So if you actually put on the BCD, the buoyancy control device.

Right. And you strap on your, your, your oxygen, like, normally it's air tank, right?

Not pure oxygen. Right. And you breathe, you do a little bit of suction.

But the way that it works, it opens the wound. You have a little bit of negative pressure that you have a little bit of inspiratory pressure.

The valve opens and that tank pushes. Right.

That is positive pressure breathing. Right.

Anybody here playing the oboe or any woodwind instrument or or.

All my all my musical analogies are lost, it seems. Trumpets.

Any instrument. All right. Okay. A few.

Okay. All right. So the oboe has a very tiny, very tiny mouthpiece, right.

If you see an oval player. Right.

Next time you go to see the BSO, look at the neck of the oboe player or the trumpet player when they actually, you know, do an attack, right?

Boom. The neck is going like this. Right.

And what happens to the intra thoracic pressure? How do they actually generate that pressure.

It's like tiny little mouthpiece for the oboe for the, you know, English horn French horn.

Both, right? You contract your abdominal muscles.

You know, you're pushing up against the, the thorax, right.

And your indoor thoracic pressure can go up to 50mm of mercury or more if you're lifting something heavy.

What do you do? You contract your abdomen muscles, right.

And then you're trying to lift something up, right? Weightlifters.

Olympic weightlifters, right. Have to be very stiff.

That pivot in the hip. Right. The way that you make the stiffness by contracting all the muscles that you have of your upper body.

How do you not do it like this? Right. So that intra thoracic pressure can go up way high.

Right. What happens to your cardiac output if you're operating somewhere over here goes way down almost zero.

We probably talk about something called about salvo maneuver.

If you haven't heard of this, it's essentially you take a deep breath in and then you try to exhale against the closed glottis here.

It's like a training maneuver. Right. But when we talk about the, um, the cardiovascular reflex mechanism, if you look at heart rate behavior.

It's going to be a very. Cool,

a very interesting indicator of hydrated response and potentially autonomic neuropathies because you're cutting off essentially all of venous return,

right? Heartbeats of course. Right.

And you're looking for very characteristic response of heart rate to that restraining maneuver, what you do during that time.

So you're going into thoracic pressure from -four millimeters of mercury to plus 20 to plus 30.

And then you're releasing. Okay. All right.

So cardiac output curves heart lung pumping unit.

Right. What do changes in heart rate too. Well what is our unknown.

We assume normal region one.

Right. Cardiac output is heart rate times c d over p f minus CSRPPA0.

In the isolated heart lung pumping unit. Right.

This is exactly equal to this. In the isolated hard lung pumping unit, the slope.

Of our cardiac output curve. Directly proportional.

To. Cardiac to. To heart rate. Right. So we increase heart rate.

We increase the slope. We decrease heart rate. We decrease the slope. Right.

What happens to the that input output relationship of the heart lung pumping unit if we change the total peripheral resistance?

Nada. Nothing. Yeah, right.

Because total peripheral resistance is a is is it characteristic is a parameter of the peripheral circulation.

It's not a parameter of the heart lung pumping unit. So it doesn't change.

It's independent thereof. Right. Same way that we said what happens to the peripheral circulation characteristic when we change heart rate?

Nothing. Heart rate is a parameter of the heart lung pump pumping unit.

Right. So keep this concept separate. Sympathetic tone.

Your fight or flight response, right? You are.

Sitting here. You just had your bagel. Maybe you had a coffee.

Right. So coffee means that you might be in a somewhat stimulated state, right?

That affects heart rate and in fact, contractility.

Contractility as an offset over here. Heart rate as a slope.

Right.

And if you are in your postprandial state, as I said after your Thanksgiving meal and you are hanging out at the couch in your parents place, right?

You are in your rest and digest state. Heart rate decreases and your characteristic behavior of the heart lung pumping unit changes.

What about resistive load? I said so resistive load means after load right?

Means peripheral resistance. And through that we mean arterial blood pressure.

So from one half the normal to afterload of the heart lung pumping unit to about 1.3.

More or less the same. So you have to, as we already saw from that three dimensional plot, right?

You have to go to very high levels of load before you limit the behavior of the hard, long pumping unit.

Meaning if your blood pressures mean arterial blood pressure goes up from.

90 to 100 and 80 to 110. Your heart on pumping unit doesn't care.

It can push against us. Now, if you're meaner to a blood pressure, meaner to a professional systolic mean arterial blood pressure than 60.

That's bad. Right? And even at that level, your heart lung pumping unit says I'm out of here, right?

I can pump against that level of load. Even Arnold at some point says I've had enough.

Right. Can't do it anymore. And that's what happens over here.

And of course, if you go above that. Right.

Okay. So. The finale is here.

You've all anticipated it, right? Everything.

The whole orchestra is going crazy. What determines cardiac output?

We still haven't answered. This is our input output relationship of the heart lung pumping unit.

Right. And we had the input output relationship now many times of the peripheral circulation.

In steady state. Right. Here are the relationships.

Heart. Lung. Pumping unit. Input pressure to the heart lung pumping unit is the flow coming out of the heart lung pumping unit.

Q. Ignore that for a second.

Over here. Peripheral circulation.

The downstream pressure is the feeling pressure and the flow going through the peripheral circulation is Q.

Here are our characteristics. Heart lung pumping unit.

Venous return equation. Right. So what determines cardiac output in steady state?

Those two units have two. Those two flows, venous return and cardiac output have to be the same.

Right they have to match. So. Can we determine this?

Yes we can. Right. Here's our cardiac output equation.

Here's our venous return equation. Right.

If we eliminate the feeling pressure from these two or from one of them, put it in the other.

Here's what we good. Ugly. Look at it.

It leaves a mark in your retina. You never have to look at it again.

Right. Don't even put on your cheat sheet for the midterm exam. Right.

It doesn't matter. It's an algebraic solution to eliminating the filling pressure over here.

Plugging in what you have over here and resolving it for Q nobody ever uses this equation.

And thou shalt not. Right, because the simpler representation is here.

In steady state. The reason why I have been harping on this,

that we are characterizing the venous return curve as a function of the venous return going through the heart,

coming back from the peripheral circulation as a function of the mean right atrial pressure,

and the cardiac output coming out of the heart lung pumping unit as a function of the mean right atrial pressure.

Is that in steady state they have to be the same. And there's only one point of intersection between these curves.

When I asked you at the beginning of the third lecture, well, what does cardiac output do when we're actually doubling the peripheral resistance?

Well, now you can tell me. Right. Because the peripheral resistance.

Is a is a parameter of the venous return curve of the.

Of the of the peripheral circulation.

The cardiac output curve doesn't care about peripheral resistance as long as it's 1.6 or 1.63 times higher, right?

As long as we're in region one, right? What happens is that this point over here, the mean systemic pressure will be the same.

This slope will increase. And the new intersection point.

Will be over here. So we can determine what cardiac output will be.

If we double the heart rate, if we change the peripheral resistance, if we change total blood volume.

Because in steady state. But the heart lung pumping unit gives out.

Has to equal but the venous return, but the peripheral circulation gives back.

So there is no such thing as a cardiac concept or a peripheral circulation concept.

In steady state, those two have to intersect. Right.

So you're duly dependent both on the performance of the heart through the cardiac output curve.

And the performance of the peripheral circulation through the venous return curve.

And now we can predict. We can see what cardiac output does under a different.

Conditions. End of the symphony.

Okay. Now. We play around with this concept.

One thing that we are doing over here. Is we're breathing.

And when we're breathing, we're actually changing what our intra thoracic pressure inhalation.

The main muscle of inhalation is. There's a diaphragm, right.

Innervated by the. All right. Okay, good.

Good. So. Phrenic. Right. Diaphragm. Diaphragm descends into thoracic pressure becomes more negative.

If interest rates pressure becomes more negative. Is akin to negative pressure breathing.

Right. How much does cardiac output increase during inhalation?

Take a deep breath and as much as you can right until you reach.

What is it called? Total lung capacity.

Right. How much do we increase cardiac output?

About 15%. Not all that much. Right.

Because we operating fairly close. To that plateau.

Now we're doing a big exhalation. Until we can't squeeze any more.

And it hurts, right? That's akin to positive pressure ventilation, right?

And we can actually drop our cardiac output quite substantially because we're squeezing on the right atrium on the inter thoracic.

That's what we're actually reducing transfer pressure of the intra thoracic structures.

Right. So as we're breathing in and we're breathing out what's happening to our cardiac output.

It's changing. All right. So as we are just passively doing title breathing, our cardiac output actually fluctuates.

Right. Goes up doing inhalation goes down during exhalation.

There are also neural pathways that act on this time scale, as you will see.

But as we're breathing in, breathing out, you're just moving up and down the venous return curve.

Right. So that gives rise very passive mechanical rise to oscillations in cardiac output with the, um, frequency of breathing.

One thing I forgot to mention over here that I wanted to say, let's come back to this over here.

Cardiac output is heart rate times talk for. And I let you down the wrong path of thinking that if I double heart rate, I double cardiac output.

Right. But then what we also said is that stroke volume here is not a constant, but stroke volume is a function of heart rate, right?

And. One of the, however, is that I told you.

When we talked about the cardiac concept. However, if you actually actually pace an animal.

And you change the heart rate. Increase the heart rate.

Cardiac output is not changing much.

Reason why is because you're also operating fairly close to the maximum over here to the plateau of the venous return curve.

So if you're changing your heart rate, you're changing the slope over here.

Right. If you're changing your heart rate a lot, you can make that slope quite steep.

But by how much does your heart rate go up? Your cardiac output goes up.

Less than 10%. Right. Because you're operating very close to that knee of the venous return curve.

Very close to that plateau has to do with the fact also that the stroke volume is dependent on heart rate over here.

So. What happens to cardiac output.

If we increase the arterial and venous tone. Smooth venous smooth muscle tone.

So we're squeezing the arteries in the peripheral circulation.

And we're squeezing the veins. For squeezing the arteries.

What parameter on the peripheral circulation changes? Resistance.

RA the micro circulatory resistance. That leads to a change in the slope.

Right. Becomes flatter. Because resistance is going up, one of the resistance is going down.

Right. What if we're actually squeezing the veins? Think of the veins as a capacitance vessel.

If you're squeezing the vascular smooth muscle, they will shrink and the zero pressure filling volume of the veins will go down,

and therefore the descending volume will go up. Which means that we're actually going from this to this to this.

Right. Anything happening on the side of the heart lung pumping unit.

When we change resistance within limits, or the peripheral circulation or descending volume of the peripheral circulation limits.

No, these are not parameters of the peripheral circulation of the heart lung pumping unit,

so that heart lung pumping in the units just stays the same.

But one thing that you see over here, if you squeeze the arteries and veins, you can actually change your cardiac output quite substantially.

Coming back to the point that you have the Venus Reservoir over here, right?

And with that venous reservoir, you can actually have quite a bit of change.

In the offset over here. Okay.

Now, if you take this to the extreme and open this large Ave fistula.

Right. Forget about with compensation for a second. All right.

What you see over here? The solid line is our control line.

Over here. Over here and over here.

Right. And then you essentially drop IRA down to close to zero.

And initially the mean systemic pressure doesn't change.

This slope. Goes way up. And just by having a lot more, by having that reduced resistance, you have a lot more violence return.

Right. You still have to operate on this intersection point over here.

So your cardiac output goes from about five liters per minute in this particular representation, maybe to 13l per minute.

Because you have a lot of runoff of the arterial volume into the venous volume increase in the venous return.

Right. If you have that very low resistance pathway between a large artery and a large vein.

Right. What happens to arterial blood pressure? Goes way down.

Right. Because you have a very low resistance. Cardiac output goes up very significantly, but resistance has gone way down.

Blood pressure tends to go down. Blood pressure tends to go down.

As you will see, we have sensors throughout the arterial system that tries to maintain arterial blood pressure constant.

This will be the block after the electrophysiology. Right.

And so what are the effective mechanisms that we have. We can bring heart rate up.

We can increase contractility.

We can increase resistance, which would not be very effective over here because you have this massive short circuit and we can squeeze the veins.

Right.

And what is indicated over here is that the compensatory response that we have a lot more to say about is that heart rate increases contractility,

increases heart rate increases even more, contractility increases even more,

so that cardiac output will further increase in order to compensate for the

significant drop in blood pressure that you usually see with these kinds of fistulas.

We'll talk about that in a lot more detail about the compensatory response.

The key here is to determine. If you have an insult in the uncompensated, uncontrolled cardiovascular system, right?

What is the primary parameter that's being that that is being affected, right.

Heart attack systolic compliance of the heart.

Probably all of the of the left ventricle. Diastolic compliance of the left ventricle.

How does this affect the performance of the cardiac output and venous return curves?

Here's a common one. And when we talk about the, um.

Um. The control block of the class will come back to this.

An interesting experiment that one would not be able to do anymore, because someone took the entire class of medical students,

tilted them up, and if they hadn't fainted at that point, they did a blood draw.

Reduce the blood volume until fainting. And then they said, oh, you just going to give the blood back people?

And, um, she took them back. And people come back like this, right?

No longer possible. For better so that we're clear normal.

So when this is all that we've done today, right, we all got up.

And at the end of the lecture we will all get up again. Right.

So here is our normal cardiac output. And venous return curve, right?

Tilt or tilt table test. The patient is lying horizontally on a on a table, and that table can actually just tilt up like this.

Head up not head down. Head up. Right. And you're measuring the blood pressure.

You're measuring that. You can measure the cardiac output. You're measuring the heart rate response.

Right. But what happens when you actually lying down like this.

And then you're getting up in the morning. Well.

Your main body axis is now aligned with gravity, right?

When you're lying down over here, it's like, yeah, there's a gravitational vector this way.

But, you know, anterior posteriorly it doesn't do much. Right.

We have bipeds. So when we're up like this.

Gravity is acting along the main body axis, and it's trying to pool blood in our dependent vasculature below the level of the heart.

Right. And so the way to think about a tilt is essentially.

A massive increase in zero pressure filling volume. Right.

Because the blood that is now passively pooled in your dependent vasculature, um, is not participating in the distension of the vessels.

Right. Or it's not actively participating in, in descending pressure.

So the first thing to to think about this is you essentially lose the sending volume, right?

So you mean systemic pressure goes down.

And then you have an increase or compensatory increase in resistance, which then changes the slope a little bit.

Right. So you go from this point A.

To this point P, where you're already compensated a little bit by an increase in heart rate and an increase in contractility.

Right. But in terms of cardiac output, as I'm standing over here,

my cardiac output is lower than the cardiac output that I would have if I were to be lying down.

And if someone faints. And what do you do? Fainting.

For, let's say, hypovolemic mechanisms, sort of not basal vagal or or um.

Um, higher order um reactions.

People can faint if they see something gruesome. Right. That's an interpretation of the brain.

But if you have like lower volume. You fall down, right?

And usually what happens is you come right back. Why?

Because when you go down, the gravitational gradient is abolished,

and all the volume that has been extra visited in the dependent vasculature, right, comes back.

You're moving from this point over here to this point over here.

You're increasing your venous return. By the moment that you increase your venous return, your cardiac output comes up.

Perfusion to the brain goes back up right. And people come right back.

So fainting is a very effective protective mechanism.

All right. All you have to do. Hopefully protect the.

Protect the head, not knock yourself on the way down. Right.

But if still someone is not there, what do you do? You raise the legs.

Right? Because this way you bring even more volume back to the heart.

All right, so that's why you bring down the head. Jacket.

Sweater. What is underneath that? Right. And then you raise the legs so that there's more venous return coming back.

Cardiac output pop back up, blood pressure comes back, and people usually pop back up.

What happens is I mentioned if you actually tilt and then hemorrhage the people.

Right. Now you're losing. Total blood volume mean systemic pressure goes down even further.

Yeah. Your resistance goes up a little bit more. It tries to compensate for a double whammy.

Right. But your cardiac output is very far down in here because we're operating close to that knee.

Your increase in heart rate is never really that effective. Right.

So changes in cardiac output. A very effectively mediated by changes of what happens what comes back to the heart.

Now contractility can make a difference. Heart rate can make a little bit of a difference.

But in the closed loop circulation, isolated changes in heart rate doesn't push your cardiac output by all that much.

Um. Have a little bit more time.

Uh, changing the sympathetic stimulation, both heart and vasculature.

And this gets complicated, but I'll just give you an overview.

As I said, we'll come back to all of this. Again, solid line is our baseline.

Right now we stimulate the sympathetic system, meaning that it's a fight or flight response.

And we're getting ready to fight. We're getting ready on the treadmill. We're really ready to do you know that exercise, right?

We're revving up. So what happens to heart rate?

Heart rate is increasing. Right. Contractility is increasing.

Right. As we're actually as our sympathetic nervous system gets activated,

we have release of epinephrine norepinephrine in, you know, at the level at the side of the vascular smooth muscle.

So the smooth muscle constricts both on the arterial side and on the venous side.

Right. Arterial venous side change in mean systemic pressure.

We have essentially an increase in the we have a decrease in the zero pressure feeling volume, an increase in the, um descending volume.

Right. And we have a reduction in the slope over here because of the increase in the peripheral vascular resistance.

The opposite is true. If we give spinal anesthesia and we abolish these reflex mechanisms.

Right. And we're going down in slope, cardiac and heart rate and we're going we're releasing as a tone a baseline tension of the arteries and veins.

Right. So we're reducing that tension. And we have essentially a decrease in the mean systemic pressure because we're

affecting an increase in the um in the zero pressure filling volume of these vessels.

And a normal state is one of slight constriction of these vessels.

Let's see. Exercise would come back to.

Okay. So I think I we gave some of these things on the, um, uh, on the problem set.

Maybe not this one. Maybe it's going to kind of come on the next one.

But one thing that I wanted to go through with you briefly, um, actually, let me take this one,

is how to think through step changes, both from the cardiac output venous return curve and from the PD look kind of perspective.

And a very effective way to think about this is here we have the left ventricular volume.

And the left ventricular pressure.

And here. We have the right atrial pressure, which is also our feeling pressure.

And we have the cardiac output venous return.

So our baseline looks something like this.

And this intersection point happens close to zero.

And our end systolic and diastolic pressure volume relationship is here.

And or and systolic pressure volume relationship is here. And let's say we're operating.

Like this. Okay. So.

Want to translate between those two. And.

The first thing that we want to do. Let's say we constrict the veins. This should be horizontal.

Over here. A useful approach to problems like this is to think about a step change.

Meaning. Let's say. We have a step increase in the tension of the veins only.

Right. So from time t0 to the next timestep, there's a step increase in the.

Tension of the of the venous vessels. Right.

Think of it this way that they're, that you have a rubber band. Right.

And that those, that rubber band is, is stretched to a certain distance.

And now someone comes by, flips the switch, and all of a sudden the spring constant is much stiffer, right?

You hold it to the same distance. But the attention that you have to the force that you have to apply is much higher.

Right. The equivalence here is that you're actually squeezing the vessels.

Right. And you have a step increase a step decrease in the zero pressure filling volume.

That means you have a step increase in the total, the standing.

Volume. Right. So the step increase over here would be going from something like this over here to something like this over here.

That slope stays the same and you end up over here.

Right. That means that the venous return coming back to the right heart.

Sees a step increase. Right.

Squeeze your veins. You're pushing more volume instantaneously to the right heart.

All right. Let's say that you're at the end of your feeling pressure or towards the end.

When that step increase happens. Right.

You have now. An additional volume that has been returned.

All other things being equal, your heart does exactly the same thing.

It increases to the same afterload. It comes back on the same ancestry pressure volume relationship.

And if that happens. You just increased your stroke volume.

Right. No.

Whatever the right heart sees and gives out.

The left heart can pump in region one unless otherwise indicated.

We're always operating in region one of this part of the course, right?

When we get to the path of physiology, Colin will modulate that statement, right.

But this is how you can think of a step increase over here.

And how this translates into step increase over here now. Now you have increased.

Your heart lung pumping unit has given out an increased stroke volume over here.

Right. Total peripheral resistance is still the same.

What happens to arterial blood pressure in the next cycle? Cardiac output has gone up a little bit.

Heart rate stays the same. Peripheral resistance blood pressure has to go up right.

So in the next cycle around you might still actually see. A little bit of an increase over here, but not arterial blood pressure has gone up.

So now you might come to something that looks like this.

Right. And you will you will actually see a new steady state that emerges.

We're just squeezing a little bit of the veins. Leads to an increased stroke volume.

Right. Because you have a transient one.

On the transient, you have a, you know, step increase in, in in venous return that's affected by this offset over here.

Right. So that's what we've drawn over here.

This is sort of the blue where we already have sort of an increase.

You're not coming back to the same diastolic blood pressure. You come back to a slightly higher pressure.

And this is how you can think things through a little bit. And we'll help you with that.

I mean, it takes a little bit of exercise because. With the cardiac output.

In Minions Return Curve, you have the previous loops and you have these pressures versus time.

And how are we going to put all of these together? We'll get some exercise in that.

Right. The important point of emphasis for today is, um.

Before I go to a couple of other things is, is is really the that integrated function of the heart lung pumping unit and

the peripheral circulation as a closed loop circuit right in steady state.

What comes back through the peripheral circulation and what is given out through the heart lung pumping unit has to be the same.

Right. And all of that dissecting and mathematics and algebra that we did.

And the arithmetic, the sort of the mental arithmetic that we did to try to understand the biophysics of both the peripheral circulation,

but also the heart lung pumping unit today. All leads to the fact that we can now do that intersecting of these two input output relationships.

And we can go through exactly this kind of exercise where we say, number one, which parameter is affected by the pathology.

Or by the injury. Number two. Is this a parameter of the peripheral circulation, or is that a parameter of the heart lung pumping unit?

Right. If it's a parameter of the heart lung pumping unit, the peripheral circulation will not change.

In the uncontrolled state. Stays the same.

Right. If it's the parameter of the heart lung pumping unit, what is changed at the heart rate going down is either going up.

The contractility going down is contributor going to be in region one or in region two or in the region three?

Right. The perimeter of the peripheral circulation, the heart lung pumping unit.

The cardiac output curve does not change. It stays the same.

The point of intersection of the two will change, because that is ultimately the new cardiac output,

and that determines both of the performance of the heart lung pumping unit and the performance of the peripheral circulation.

That's the definition of that intersection point, and that's our cardiac output.

Okay. So try to think in terms of these algorithms, or at least for most of us, it will help because,

as I said at the beginning of the first or the third lecture, the heart and the cardiovascular system.

Is nonlinear. It's time varying on multiple levels.

Right. It's controlled. We haven't talked about this yet or we started talking about a little bit, but you haven't talked about it in depth, right?

It's closed loop. And that's exactly the point that we are not very good in thinking in terms of closed loop.

But now we have a very concrete way of thinking about it at the intersection of the heart lung pumping unit.

And what determines the cardiac output is the intersection of those two curves.

Right. That's the essence of today's lecture. We can work through a few more examples, or I can just take you through it here.

We already talked about blood loss, hemorrhage, tilting right. Blood loss, simple change, reduction in mean systemic pressure.

Cardiac output curve doesn't change with changes in the total volume.

So it's that it's it's a reduction in the mean systemic pressure resistance.

You know, uh, the slope of this curve stays the same if you're actually going into a reduced venous return state.

Right. You're right. Hard. Has a reduced ventricular output.

That reduced ventricular output on the right heart is translated to the left heart.

You're you're you're moving down the and study pressure volume relationship.

Ultimately also the arterial blood pressure goes down right.

And your and your and your p value moves to the left.

Okay. And again, if we give you the timing information.

Arterial diastolic arterial blood pressure, peak arterial blood pressure, and end systolic arterial blood pressure,

we could reconstruct the arterial blood pressure waveform of the systemic arterial system and the left ventricular blood pressure.

If we were to give you the timing information. Pneumothorax.

Now you have a stab wound to the chest. Not to the groin.

We get stab wounds to all sorts of body parts, right?

What happens? Well, you lose your negative intra thoracic pressure, at least on one side of the lungs.

Quite akin to positive pressure ventilation, meaning that you actually have no longer that negative pressure to keep distended.

Right. You're shifting significantly to the right. If you are shifting significantly to the right in your cardiac output curve,

your venous return curve stays the same into a thoracic pressure, not a parameter of the peripheral circulation.

Right now, your cardiac output goes way down over here, right?

Venous return goes down. Right ventricular output goes down.

What happens to left ventricular output and diastolic pressure volume going down right.

Just because they're squeeze on the heart. Right.

So talking about evolution again it's like the negative pressure really keeps things nice and open.

All right. I think the last one that I have.

What is this? Myocardial infarction. The big one. All right.

We'll talk more about of course, when we talk about ischemia, heart disease.

But that's our first lecture. The case the old lady.

Right.

Control and systolic pressure, volume relationship, and systolic and diastolic pressure of one relationship and systolic pressure volume relationship.

Equilibrium point over here, right. And systolic capacitance and does solely comprise the capacitance of the right or the left heart,

depending on where the myocardial infarction is, is not a parameter of the peripheral circulation.

Right. So peripheral circulation characteristics stays exactly the same.

Right. What happens to the slope? And systolic and diastolic capacitances are compromised.

Right. So, you know, sliding down that.

And that that means this return curve, right?

Cardiac output slides down. And systolic compliance goes up.

And diastolic compliance goes down. One over those compliances is what determines the slope in this representation.

Right. Narrowing down so you can maintain.

The same stroke volume. You can maintain the same cardiac output.

You continue. You can maintain the same stroke volume at massively increased and diastolic pressures.

If this becomes a lot steeper. Right. Your diastolic pressure has to go up.

You're running danger of reaching that.

Pulmonary edema threshold. Right now.

You can also operate on a smaller stroke volume.

Maintain your cardiac output by increasing. Heart rate.

Right heart rate one of the key determinants of metabolic need of the heart.

You're in a state of oxygen. Relative oxygen mismatch between what the heart needs.

And what the hard gets now. Heart rate is going up, meaning that you're actually increasing.

The mismatch. And more and more injury ensues.

Right and you're moving even further up that and solid pressure volume relationship.

And now you're probably at around 30 or 40mm of mercury fluid is backing up in the left atrium.

And your patient is a danger of going into pulmonary edema.

Okay. And systolic and diastolic compliance both change.

As I said, we obviously have a lot more to say about this when we talk about the,

um, ischemic heart disease taught by the illustrious Professor Colin Stoltz.

Um. That's it. We've covered all of cardiovascular mechanics.

We've we've covered the cardiac cycle. That's it.

We will have a few lectures on the electrophysiology, then a few lectures on a couple of lectures on control of the cardiovascular system.

When we talk about sympathetics parasympathetic, you know, renin angiotensin system and then its pathophysiology.

Right. If you have questions, come see us.

Right. Let us know if you're struggling with some of the material.

But one thing I want to make clear is we're going rapidly and we have to go rapidly.

Otherwise we're not going to cover the material. All right. All right. Thanks.

We'll see you on Thursday. Back in 25. Thank you.

