[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
I know I. All right.

Good morning. Uh, it it sort of diffuses out slowly.

How was the break? RESTful. Good.

That's good. All right. Too short or too short?

Is it? Always is. Okay. All right. Today we're going to wrap up the the physiology part.

And then. The. Let's just talk to Staats.

We'll take over on, uh, on Thursday. Uh, and I think we're going to jump, right, either right into hypertension or ischemia.

Heart disease. But before we do that, uh, let's pick up where we left off, and I thought I orient you all.

This is Theo Nino talking about cardiovascular pathophysiology.

Right? Um. Uh, you're probably sick and tired by this by now, but just to, um, re-emphasize that we said we can look at the heart as a current source.

We can look at it as a pressure source. Right. And one of the key points that we set in relation to the control of the cardiovascular system,

if we somehow manage to keep arterial blood pressure at the level of the heart or close to thereabouts constant, then the individual peripheral.

Micro circulatory beds have the ability to regulate their own blood supply without stealing flow from the other circuits from the other territories.

Okay. And we had a lot of emphasis on the heart lung pumping unit and cardiac output

regulation through the cardiac output and venous return curve mechanism.

And I also said at the beginning that at some point we will switch to not the maintenance of cardiac output,

but the maintenance of arterial blood pressure to low blood pressure.

Main stages. We took an engineering approach and we said we can at some aggregate level or abstracted level, look at a homeostatic, um,

process from the point of view of a feedback control system where we have somehow, somewhere, someone knows what the value ought to be.

Through some sensors, we can take a measurement of this controlled variable in our case for now.

Arterial blood pressure. Systemic arterial blood pressure. What is measured is compared to that reference that creates an error signal.

There's some control logic that determines if the error is non-zero, how the system should respond through effective mechanisms.

In order to bring that controlled variable closer to the set point.

Okay. Clearly there has to be a communication system in order to relay that information.

We said that communication system for the extrinsic control or the global control of the cardiovascular system is the autonomic nervous system.

We have two branches thereof. We have the parasympathetic division, the rest and digest or also known as the cerebral.

Um, uh, the, um, yeah, cerebral. Uh.

No, this is a Columbo. It's a sympathetic division, but the cranial nerves from the, um.

Uh. From the brain, uh, have a large influence over the parasympathetic division.

Uh, and then we have the sympathetic division of the fight or flight response, which is the thorax or lumbar.

Um, uh, division is the, um, uh, is the other element of that push pull phenomenon, as we will see.

We briefly talked about, uh, adrenergic receptors and, uh, uh, neurotransmitters norepinephrine, epinephrine, and isopropanol.

We said that alpha receptors primarily on the vascular smooth muscle, very powerful smooth muscle constrictors.

Right. Uh, also leads to intestinal relaxation, pupillary dilation, beta receptors.

At the cardiac side, beta one receptors increase heart rate, increase contractility when stimulated.

And then we have beta two receptors on the peripheral, um vascular smooth muscle, which leads to better relaxation.

And we also said that, for example, epinephrine in the periphery can have both beta two and alpha effects.

And we talked about EpiPens for example,

that we really want to have high dose epinephrine for a vasoconstrictor response if someone is in anaphylactic shock.

Massive waves of dilatory response. We do not want to dilate the vasculature any further.

This is in your course notes. Uh, that's on canvas.

The key part that we are interested in here is the heart. Right.

And so if we have an adrenergic impulse or, uh, increase in the sympathetic activity.

We have an increase in heart rate, an increase in contractility and an increase in the conduction velocity.

We prepare the heart for increased activity. We also have increased automaticity and conduction velocity through the a v node.

So we there's less of a slowdown between the atrium the ventricles.

Uh, and as we've already said at the at the level of the ventricles,

we have a significant increase in contractility, uh, conduction velocity, automaticity.

Now cholinergic or parasympathetic response influences here we have decrease in heart rate.

We can bring the heart into vagal arrest by massive vagal stimulation.

It's so powerful that you can actually just stop the heart right the moment you stop the vagal stimulation.

As we will see, heart comes right back up. Um.

There's ancillary effects over here that we make that we point out.

Uh, AV block, for example, is is very similar to what we have, uh, described over here, a decrease in contractility.

Um, but by and large, we think of parasympathetic influence on the heart as massive bradycardia.

Right. Hard as we will see. Can go into a rest.

On the arterial. On the peripheral circulation. Uh, Alpha response.

Very strong constriction. Right. It varies at various, um, uh, levels.

Uh, abdominal viscera constriction over here, we have, uh, significant, um.

Uh, resistance at the level of the skeletal muscle, for example.

But then on the veins of a, uh, constriction leads to, uh,

vasoconstriction leads to reduced zero pressure filling volume, as we will see on the aggregate.

And that's always something that that we need to emphasize compliance.

Not so much changed as we will see. Now you could say, well, if you actually change the vascular smooth muscle and we make this stronger,

why does the compliance not change well on aggregate on an individual vascular territory it might.

But on aggregate the the effects are more or less a washout.

So what are the effectors? And that's, I think where we left it at the end of the last lecture on aggregate,

at the system level response, we have the vascular resistance, all these white little crosses.

Right. That that we've shown in the very first diagram, venous tone, sort of the tension of the smooth muscle at the level of the veins.

Uh, heart rate and cardiac contractility. That's it. So let's take resistance first.

Here. We are showing the flow in milliliters per minute and the, uh, perfusion pressure, we should say over here in millimeters of mercury.

And what we are showing here is a uh, uh, different curves for different levels of sympathetic stimulation,

meaning that you isolate the vascular territory,

you perfused the vascular territory with a fixed perfusion pressure,

or you can vary that perfusion pressure to trace out what that characteristic curve would look like.

Right. And then you stimulate the sympathetic nurse innovating that vascular territory.

And what you see over here is that the slope of this curve is one over the resistance.

And as you increase the stimulation, the slope is getting smaller, smaller and smaller, meaning that R is getting larger, larger and larger.

Or the other way around R is getting larger and larger and larger.

The more you stimulate the sympathetics in innovating the vascular territory, and therefore the slope is getting smaller, smaller and smaller.

Okay. Meaning that if you wanted to have the same level of flow right, you would have to have a higher perfusion pressure in order to do so.

So you can shunt flow away from, um, from particular territories that way,

or you can raise or dilate and you can shunt flow towards that vascular territory.

And here's the point that I just made before the previous slide.

Um, sort of parenthetically, this is the pressure volume relationship or the volume pressure relationship of the systemic arterial system.

And the systemic venous system. Right.

Those are the the solid lines over here. These points of intersection.

We've called the zero pressure filling volume of the systemic veins and the zero pressure filling volume of the systemic arteries.

Right. And then as we change the trans mural pressure.

Right. As we increase the trans, more pressure, we increase.

The filling status of the systemic arteries.

As we increase the transmission pressure of the systemic venous system, we increase the filling status of the systemic veins.

Right. Compliance of the venous system.

Lambda compliance. We said about 100 right. Noncompliance over here about two.

Almost an order of magnitude difference.

But what happens when we actually when we stimulate now the same vascular territory that we've isolated right now we stimulate the sympathetics.

Turns out. And of course, this is a diagrammatic representation. But if you look at the underlying data, it looks the same.

One of two things can happen, or two things can happen. You could change the slope.

Right, and you can change the offset. You change the slope.

You change the capacitance or compliance, you change the offset.

You change the zero pressure filling volume. Those are the two things that can happen.

Here with a line. But what actually happens is that there's very little change in maximum stimulation over here.

In terms of the slow. So in aggregate the compliance a lumped venous or lumped arterial compliance.

There is more or less the same. But what really changes is the zero pressure feeling on.

Right. So by constricting the vascular smooth muscle on the venous side and on the arterial side, you do change the filling status.

Right. But you're primarily changing the zero pressure filling volume in aggregate.

You changed the compliance very little. That is true for sort of the aggregate.

Now if you look at an individual vascular territory, it might actually behave differently.

But in total the overall response is dominated in such a way by vascular territories that do not

change compliance characteristics as much as they actually change the zero pressure killing one.

So that's why we're thinking of the filling status of the arteries and the veins.

Under sympathetic stimulation or relaxation to be the primary driver of the hemodynamic response,

meaning that the zero pressure filling volume Q stimulate the sympathetics.

The V total zero going down. If you really if you relax the sympathetics the V total zero going up,

meaning that you're shifting volume from the descending volume from the from the unstressed volume,

or the zero pressure filling volume to the descending volume, and vice versa.

All right. Now, the amount that you shift on the arterial side.

Very little compared to the amount that you shift on the business side,

which is reflective of the amount of volume that we do have on the business side, being about what factor of two for.

Eight larger. Right. So we have about four and a half or three and a half to four liters of zero of volume stored on the venous side.

Only about 700 CCS or so of volume is stored on the systemic arterial side,

so we can mobilize a lot more volume on the Venus side than we can do on the actual side.

Then we also said earlier on that you have that whole venous capacity sitting right next to the right heart,

which can then modulate the filling pressure quite substantially and move your,

you know, up and down that venous return curve or the cardiac output curve.

Okay? Yeah. So in this particular case you would just.

So if we think in terms of parasympathetic we primarily think of parasympathetic effect on the heart itself.

Right. There is parasympathetic innervation elsewhere.

But in terms of parasympathetic or cholinergic innervation, we really think primarily of the heart in terms of the cardiovascular component.

So what we mean here by sympathetic inhibition is that we are actually abolishing the nerve traffic

that is going on the sympathetic to the particular vascular territory that we're interested.

Okay. And stimulation opposite of that.

Okay. So sympathetic effects on the peripheral circulation, primarily on the venous zero pressure filling volume and the arterial resistance.

Okay. And that is shown over here.

Sympathetic stimulation of the peripheral circulation only. What are the two things that we are interested in here?

We are interested in the slope. Right. And we all remember now this is one minus one over RV plus r a times C a over C plus v.

It's something that you're probably going to have on your sheet sheet anyways next week, right?

Right. So that is responsive to resistance.

And the mean systemic pressure v total minus v total zero over k plus c v right.

That is where that movement of volume comes in.

So if we we sympathetically stimulate that vascular territory that we isolated it does both things will not differentially.

Able to stimulate the veins over the arteries, fibers going both directions both to the arteries and veins.

So what happens is that the slope changes because the arterial resistance changes.

Right. And the mean systemic pressure changes.

Sympathetic stimulation obviously. Right because Venus zero pressure filling volume is going down, meaning the descending volume is going up,

meaning systemic pressure going up or sympathetic inhibition going the opposite direction.

So by sympathetic stimulation, you can give yourself a significant auto transfusion, right?

You're moving volume from the zero pressure filling volume to the, um, descending volume.

It is very quiet today. Everybody is fascinated by the scintillating excitement of the topic.

People are still in post spring break mode.

Heart rate, vagal slowing, as I said, and I think we've seen this in the in the lecture that I gave on the,

um, on other ethnicity and, and modulation of other ethnicity.

Right. Here you have um, I think this is from a frog sinus for gnosis.

Um, uh, from a frog. And you start to stimulate.

The parasympathetic. Immediate hyper polarization.

Of pacemaker cell. Right and immediate prolongation of the.

What would become the Aadhaar integral. You stop.

It comes right back to the threshold. Starts firing again. It takes a little bit of time.

To. For that slope to come back to normal, but the response is immediate.

You take the stimulus away, the recovery is pretty immediate. It's parasympathetic.

It's for you and I think. Let's see, I have a few more of these slides.

Also talked about the effect of heart rate on sympathetic acceleration over here.

And here you have the sympathetics being stimulated.

What you see this slope of the phase four of that action potential, right.

Getting steeper and steeper and steeper and steeper, meaning that you reach the threshold sooner and sooner and sooner and sooner.

Right. But it does take time for that to happen. And the moment you stop it.

You see that the effect persists for a certain period of time.

Same shown in the bottom over here. So we talked about that push pull phenomenon of the factor of heart rate.

What we're showing here is the change in heart rate. So this is sort of just the surface plot the change in heart rate.

This is your resting heart rate. As you increase stimulation of the parasympathetic through stimulation of the vagus nerve.

Right. You bring your heart rate down. As you then increase the sympathetic stimulation frequency, you bring heart rate back up.

And so this surface is sort of this push pull or seesaw phenomenon between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic response.

And there's a huge body of literature that looks at the baseline variability of heart rate.

Right. Because our heart rate is not metronomic. Right.

We're not like beating at exactly the same rate. There's influences as thermoregulation.

There's various, um, uh, sort of metabolic background activities that are going on with breathing.

That's another stimulus. Right. And people have made a career out of.

Analyzing the fluctuations around baseline, all right.

And trying to understand the health of the cardiovascular system, but also the cardiovascular control system.

And this is often likened to analyzing the temperature in the room.

I made that analogy in the last lecture. Right.

You can measure the baseline temperature, but that's just the temperature that the person living in this room set the thermostat at.

That just means what is comfortable to them. If you want to understand the controller mechanism.

Then you should analyze the fluctuations around this, because that would tell you kind of an input output manner.

How does a controller behave and how does a controller actually react to um.

Uh, to perturbations. Right. And as I said, there's been a hold probably 50 years of research in this field.

And, Doctor Stoltz, how much of this has translated into clinical practice?

Louder. Zero. So it's an interesting, uh, way to look at it from an engineering perspective.

Right. And people have done a lot of work in this space. And under certain circumstances, I think it is fair to say that there are infinite.

That is information that you can actually glean from it,

in particular about sort of the behavior of that push pull phenomenon between sympathetic and parasympathetic balance.

But in the end, in terms of clinical translation has not been as as effective as some might make you want to believe.

Okay. Again. Dynamics of hardware control.

Vagal stimulation or parasympathetic stimulation.

Rapid onset. Rapid offset. Primary neurotransmitter.

His acetylcholine. As cool cooling is dumped into the neural muscular junction.

It is very rapidly uh binds.

But there's also an enzyme called acetylcholinesterase that um cleaves acetylcholine.

Right. So if it doesn't bind, it's very quickly either taken up again or it is actually inactivated.

Now the sympathetic stimulation takes longer to ramp up on the order of about 15 20s.

Right. So to get revved up. But it also takes longer to, to uh, uh, to come back down.

And as I said, vagal stimulation. You can you can get an animal.

Um, uh, into cardiac arrest here.

We're not showing the beginning of the vagal stimulation. This would be over here.

Um. But we do have.

Um. Beats coming. Very long interval over here.

Right? Uh. End of vagal stimulation.

Do we say p waves? Yes.

Do we? Six complexes. Yes. Do we have a tea wave?

P q r s t p q r s t. What do we call this pit over here?

Uh. Yeah, so you can see it together. Can hold hands while doing.

Junctional. Escaping. Why? Junctional? Nothing happened.

So massive vagal stimulation, right? We're putting essentially the same node into arrest.

Right. So somewhere in the junction, there's nothing coming from the assay?

No, nothing coming from the atria. We don't see here. We might see maybe a tiny bit of of a P wave.

So I don't know whether this arrow over here is correct. Over here, over here.

But here we don't really see a P wave. Right. But narrow QRS complex.

So we know that we're traveling down the conduction pathway somewhere. Right.

And the fact that there was nothing you know, here we don't know what's happening over here, but it would be a junctional escape it.

Right. But end of vagal stimulation, whether it's happening here, over here, blood pressure ECG coming right back up, right heart rate coming back up.

And what you see over here is boom boom boom.

Right. Look at the pulse pressure right in the wind Castle approximation of the peripheral circulation.

Also pressure proportional to four point. Right.

The heart has been sitting there filling, filling, filling. Right.

A beat comes by. You have a massive stroke forward now as you actually starting to to beat again at a regular rate,

that stroke volume is going down because you're beating at a regular rate,

and that congestion that's building up in front of the heart or sort of upstream from the heart, is being taken care of.

Right. So cardiac output venous return curves might make a reemergence next week in case the

model might make a reemergence next week with dropping hints to the right and to the left.

Okay, just want to be clear about that. Okay.

So. Effector. Uh, contractility.

We talked about the isotropic state or the cardiac contractile state of the heart,

which is represented in the pressure volume loop as the slope of the end systolic pressure volume relationship.

Right. And we said that here we really have two systolic isotropic states,

meaning we have one state which is the control state with the blue uh triangles over here.

And we have one which is a state where epinephrine was given.

Right. Beta stimulation of the heart increases cardiac contractility, allows for more calcium to come in,

calcium induced calcium release and cross, which is likely to occur more so than in the blue state.

Right. So you have more forceful contractions. So increase in quality in contractility.

In the cardiac output curve.

This is um represented if we now do sympathetic stimulation of the heart itself, changing both heart rate and contractility.

And what this effect has is that we're changing the slope and we're changing the offset of the, of the of the cardiac output curve.

Right. If you look at the mathematical relationship that we derived,

you see that f times stroke volume right stroke volume is and diastolic volume minus and systolic volume and systolic volume is in the region.

One of the heart right is determined by the by this systolic um and systolic compliance times the pulmonary

arterial pressure which we assume to be constant because we have these parallel pathways of the lungs.

Right. So what we have is an eight with max with sympathetic stimulation.

Right. We have an increase in heart rate, an increase in contractility, leading to an increase in the slope and the offset to the left.

If we have zero sympathetic stimulation, we have a decrease in heart rate and a slight slope shift to the right.

Sorry. Slope, uh, decrease and red shift to the right.

And on top of this, if we're now doing parasympathetic stimulation, which further reduces, uh, heart rate,

then we have further depression of the, um, of the, uh, of the slope of the, of the cardiac output curve.

And if you put all of this together. Then this is what we would look like or it would look like.

So we have sympathetic stimulation of the heart and the peripheral circulation.

Well, it's just what we just described in the individually.

Right. Because we still think of the volume of the resistance of the heart rate and the contractility as independent variables.

All right. So let's go through this. Here's our normal point A. Right now we go to maximum sympathetic stimulation.

What does that do to our zero pressure filling volume of veins? It's decreases, right?

What does this to our total to standing volume. V.

Total minus V total zero pressure filling. Right. We'll go up removing the mean systemic pressure significantly out to the right.

Right. Also, the slope changes because the arterial resistance changes.

That's all changed to the peripheral circulation to the venous return curve.

Now what about the cardiac output curve? From the cardiac output curve.

From maximum stimulation, we change the slope. The changing heart rate.

We're changing the offset a little bit because we are changing contractility. All right.

So we are going from and what is what is the final cardiac output state.

Well the final cardiac output state is always the intersection point of these two curves.

All right. So we're going from a state that might be five liters per minute to one.

That might be ten liters per minute. All right. This is you sitting here.

Or maybe this is you sitting here, right? It was forming the lecture.

And this is you on the treadmill. All right. This is you waking up, and this is you running off to the bus.

Right? The opposite. If we have if if we relax.

Right, and we have increased zero pressure filling volume, we move our, uh, means systemic pressure to the left.

Right. The slope also changes slightly if we if we relax and our heart rate goes down, our slope decreases slightly.

The offset is going to the right. And we might be going from a cardiac output state.

That's a cardiac output state. That's. Okay.

All right. Now there are other control mechanisms.

So this is what is known as the arterial barrier reflex.

Um, and uh, we'll come back to some of the sensors, uh, just essentially now and I don't know what this slide is exactly here.

There are other control mechanisms that we'll talk about circulating blood volume,

uh, many of you, but not all of you are taking renal pathophysiology right now.

Right? So, um. Uh, we'll get to that remodeling of the cardiovascular components.

Uh, you know, all of you have taken pathology. Last time, you probably saw the hypertrophy parts.

We will see some of them in slides. Doctor Stokes is talking about heart failure.

Uh, atrophy can also happen up and downregulation of receptors and also happens with alpha receptors.

Beta receptors. You know use it or lose it.

One of the problems that people, uh, have thought about in terms of spaceflight is that when every posture is the same in space,

you really don't need much many of these cardiovascular control mechanisms,

and that contributes to astronauts having problems when they come back to Earth,

because if they've been up there for a while, some of these control mechanisms are no longer as effective.

They've also lost some volume. And so when you send them up in zero gravity, most of them will faint.

That's why they have anti suits. And they do fluid loading which is only marginally effective.

Okay. What are some of the sensors? Uh, we're still on the arterial barrier reflex side, so on the arterial side of that feed.

Feedback control mechanisms. We said at the very first lecture that one of the key or the most important

function of the cardiovascular system is to perfused the central nervous system.

Right. Second, to perfused the heart. So not surprisingly, we have stretch receptors.

At the level of the base of the neck at the carotid bifurcation.

So common carotid over here. Common carotid over here.

Internal carotid. Sorry. Uh. External carotid. Yeah.

Internal carotid over here. Right. And we have stretch receptors that essentially, um, innervate the, uh, carotid bifurcation.

And when they stretch your normal, that indicates high pressure.

If they stretch below normal, that indicates low pressure.

So something that is very close to our brain base of the neck, it's really under the angle of the jaw over here.

Right. But we also have stretch receptors at the level of the aortic arch very close to guard.

So hardwired into the feedback control mechanism is the location of the heart over here, and is the location of the brain.

And there's differential input if you're lying down and there's no hydrostatic pressure differences between this location and this location,

they're more or less giving the same reading.

But if you're starting to actually move up, then obviously this here measures or senses a lower pressure than this one over here.

Then there can be differential input. These sensors, they respond both to baseline pressure or DC pressure or mean pressure.

Right. The higher and the lower the mean pressure is, the more or the less or vice versa, the firing frequency.

But they also fire in response to the rate of change.

So what we're seeing over here is the mean arterial pressure. So you have an arterial pressure wave going on over here.

Right.

And if the mean pressure is 50 you have very little firing except for locations of where the rate of change where the pressure is quite high, right.

As the pressure is going higher and higher, the mean pressure is going higher and higher and higher.

Right. You're almost going into continuous firing mode.

Meaning that the afferent fibers coming from these baroreceptors from this bear receptor system to the brain.

Measures the rate of change measures the DC, but the higher the firing rate going to the brain,

the more information or the more information the the the higher the mean pressure,

the higher the mean pressure, the higher the firing rate, meaning it's a hypotensive information that's being transmitted over here.

The lack thereof is a hypertensive. Um, stimulation.

Uh, you've probably seen this in HSC 100, in respiratory pathophysiology.

Uh, chemoreceptors essentially at the same location very close by.

Right. Where you're also sensing blood gases.

So you can sense CO2 and O2 at various locations, right.

And they also, among other sensors located near the carotid bifurcations of the carotid bodies and near the aortic arch.

And what you've probably also, um, learned is alveolar ventilation equation.

Alveolar gas equation. Does that sound familiar? Should be.

Because I looked at your syllabus. Okay.

But what this shows over here is the maximum response of the fibers going to the brain as a function of the arterial O2 concentration.

If the arterial or two concentration is high or near normal.

100mm of mercury. Right? Very little traffic going up to the brain.

All right. You have to drop quite low. And.

But when you do, the firing rate goes up quite dramatically.

What is also shown over here is that the firing rate going to the brain of these chemoreceptors systems is also dependent on a CO2.

Meaning if you're in high per Catholic state. You're operating at a higher firing frequency than if you in high.

So. Finally, um, and we'll come back to this.

All of what we said so far relates to the arterial barrier reflex system, meaning that you have sensing pressures on the systemic arterial side.

These touch receptors where at the level of the aortic arch, at the level of the carotid bifurcation.

Right. But we likewise have stretch receptors at the level of the atria and the atrial junctions.

And those stretch receptors also fire.

Yes. A type A a type B doesn't really matter. But what they relate to the brain is a filling status of the right side of the heart.

And if the blood volume or the change in blood volume is really is is is going to do it's a hypovolemic state.

They fire very little. But if you're going through the hyperbole mix state, they're actually going quite up.

Right. So filling state is on the right side of the heart are also really to the brain.

Um. And this would become or is important because that gives us a measure of the filling status

of the cardiovascular system and one of the very powerful methods of changing cardiac output.

Is the change. It mean systemic pressure?

Right is is the status of the filling status of the cardiovascular system.

So volume regulation is another mechanism by which we can modulate the function of the cardiovascular system.

It acts on timescales much longer than the arterial barrier reflex because it acts through different mechanisms.

But. Work from guidance over here.

Try to apply sort of the similar approach of system theory that we've just went through,

and feedback control mechanisms that you went to through for the terrible reflex to volume regulation.

And let me let me walk you through this. So where do we start?

We have I mean, systemic pressure. Right.

PMS, we call this year's MSP just a permutation of the same letters.

Right. You subtract right atrial pressure from that.

And you have the driving pressure. Through.

The peripheral circulation. Right. Remember that one of the key insights that we got from our venous return curve

analysis is that we said that the venous return to the heart is equal to.

Uh, mean systemic pressure. Uh, sorry.

Yeah. Mean systemic pressure minus the feeling pressure of the heart right over our a r v plus r a c a plus c a plus c.

We remember that. Right?

And we said that the mean systemic pressure that we defined.

As the total volume minus the total zero pressure filling volume over C a plus c

v plays the role of the upstream pressure in our venous return curve analysis.

Right. And we also said that if we say that the resistance to venous return, we didn't call it that way,

but we just can call it like this because here we call it resistance to Venus.

Return is simply the minus one over r v plus r a c a okay plus c v.

Okay, so that's exactly what we're saying over here.

The mean systemic pressure minus the right atrial pressure is our driving pressure for venous return.

Right. That's the numerator. We divide this by the resistance to venous return over here.

Right. And we get the venous return. In steady state, the venous return has to be equal to the cardiac output.

Right. We multiply the cardiac output by total peripheral resistance.

We got a terrible pressure. So far, so good.

All right. You all with me? Now there is a relationship between the arterial pressure right, and the urine output.

The arterial pressure becomes too high, right? Your kidneys.

Kidneys kick in and say, I got to get rid of volume.

As we will see. Right. It means you are an output over here.

Intake minus the urine output, gives you the rate of change of the balance in fluid status, right?

You integrate that rate of change. And you get the change in extracellular fluid volume.

And there's a relationship between the extracellular fluid volume and the blood volume.

And the blood volume determines the mean systemic pressure. Yeah.

Venous return must equal cardiac output in steady state. Times.

Sort of. Peripheral resistance gives you arterial blood pressure.

Okay, now, what I'm telling you is that there's a relationship between the actual blood pressure and your urine output.

As we will see, I give you a crash course in renal physiology in just a few slides.

Okay now. Urine output is what you losing.

In terms of volume. Intake of fluid is what you what are you bringing in?

Right. The difference of the two is the rate of change.

In fluid status. Right. If intake is equal to the output, no change intake larger than the output.

You're swelling up. If output larger than input, you're losing volume.

You're shriveling. You integrate that there would be the change in extracellular fluid volume, or you could just say change in fluid status.

Right in this fluid status relationship to the mean systemic pressure over here.

These. These characteristic curves are not really that important,

other than to say that there is a closed loop over here that affects cardiac output and venous return.

We will talk about that. Right? We'll talk about that now.

So for those of you who are taking renal pathophysiology, you can sing along, right?

The functional unit. Of, but there's about a third of you that don't take.

So that's why we have to put it here. Right. So functional unit of the kidney is the.

Good, right? We have the. Glamorous.

What is this space called? All right. Excellent.

Good. All right, so I'll take over from here. Okay, so we have an affront.

Arterial. Blood going into this lobular space over here.

Right. Here. Translate can actually leave.

This is a capillary system can actually leave the vascular space. And going into that collection system called sort of the Bowman space.

And this is all here called typical American right.

Blood coming from the renal artery going in. Yeah. Some stuff that's leaving and that's entering what is called the nephron over here.

That convoluted structure. Right. End story over here.

It's called urine. Okay. However, not everything that goes out over here comes out over here.

Because you can reabsorb things. Or you can dumb things.

Right. So input. There's a little bit of leakage into that,

a lot of leakage into that Roman space over here that is that is picked up by that Bowman capsule into this tubular network.

Right. There's a very ingenious kind of current mechanism over here that allows you to concentrate urine or to dilute urine.

Right. And that is the primary, our primary way of dealing with volume regulation,

but also a way to deal with regulation and also a way to deal with electrolytes.

And this always blows my mind. On average per day, we're filtering about 180l in all of our nephrons.

All right. So maybe one question that I should ask in the future is if you now that,

you know, you you opened your faucet, you measured the, the the flow coming out.

Right. How much volume does it take to actually fill up the whole the whole, um, bathtub.

Over an interesting question. Right, 180l per day is a lot.

So meaning that in terms of water that's filtered at that moment space, it's 180l per day.

Obviously we're not peeing out 180l per day, right?

We wouldn't be carrying a toilet with us, so we would be categorized in order to do that.

Now some people have. Diabetes insipidus?

Or have you no problems reclaiming that water, but the amount that is excreted per day is about 1/100 of that.

On average, we're giving only about less than two.

To, uh. Two liters, meaning that the amount that's reabsorbed of water that is actually reabsorbed along this tubular structure.

So you're dumping out 180l a day over here, right?

You're only giving out 1.8l out here. So 99% of that water is reclaimed.

Right. Evolutionarily makes sense. Why do we want to hold on to water?

Because we didn't know where the next water pit was. Same with sodium.

630g of sodium filtered per day 23.2g given out 99.5.

Glucose. 180g per day.

Filtered. Under normal circumstances, nothing given out.

We're holding on to glucose with our dear life. Right.

The nephron is very good in reclaiming.

Glucose. My favorite story here is that of my, um, classmate.

When I graduated from high school, Germany still had a general draft, so we all had to.

At some point, the males had to present to the local, um, uh, draft board for a medical examination.

Um. Read it. And everybody try to get out of it.

Uh, friend of mine in high school went clubbing the night before.

And then he didn't have anything to eat at home. Except for two liter bottle of Coke.

So what did he do for breakfast? He chucked two liters of coke. And then he went to the draft board.

He wasn't the brightest. And he clearly didn't know physiology.

Right. Neither did I at the time. So what do we have to do?

Well, you have to give a urine sample. One of the things that you don't do when you're 19 or 20 or 21, or maybe you're 22.

You usually don't go to your annual PCP.

Right. So it's not uncommon to find. Chronic or diseases that have, uh, onset in the young.

You know when you're going through your draft examination. So when he gave his urine sample.

What do you think was in that urine sample? Sugar.

Because it turns out as you, you know, as you learned in, in renal physiology, the system can be overwhelmed.

Right. So if you provide more, um.

Glucose. Then the transport mechanisms can accommodate what ends up in your urine glucose.

What should not end up in your urine? Glucose? What are you diagnosed with when you have sugar in your urine?

Diabetes. So he was diagnosed. Diagnosed with a condition called Modi.

Modi. Mature onset diabetes in the young.

Did you have to go to the military? No, because he was diabetic.

Right. Did he know what he was doing? No.

Right. He was given a slip that go to your PCP.

You need to have this repeat measurement done. You need.

We're very sorry to tell you that you are diabetic, and you have to deal with this for the rest of your life.

You don't have to serve in the German military, right? He went to his physician.

The physician, as you know, did a repeat measurement,

zero glucose in his urine because he didn't chuck two liters of of coke the night before or the day before or the day off.

Right. And he said, congratulations. You just got out of the draft. Right.

Others who didn't know that had to find other ways to get around it.

I leave it at that. Okay, so you can overwhelm these mechanisms.

But if we don't have enough glucose, we get unconscious.

Right. We are reclaiming 100% of glucose over here.

So I thought that this story is long enough for Rachel to come back to tell us that the coffee is here.

Um. Maybe not. So we'll go to the next slide. So we have different sensors throughout the cardiovascular system.

We talked about the very fast acting ones. Right. The arterial by reflex, parasympathetic very fast sympathetic on the order of tens of seconds.

We have the volume receptors, as we already said, atria and large veins also neurally mediated.

So in principle actually quite fast in terms of the sensing.

But because there are volume sensors and volume influences,

the the effector mechanisms that relate to the kidneys are actually slower to act on the, on the, on the, on the, on the order of minutes to hours.

We talked about the carotid and aortic receptors.

We talk we will talk about the just about Paradis in a second.

And we also have Osmo receptors. In the hypothalamus.

So we can we can, um, we can, uh, we can make sense.

The osmolality or osmolarity of the blood.

And if it's too high or too low, we can modulate the fluid status.

And we will also talk about macula denser cells. So maybe we'll get to all of renal physiology in another couple of minutes.

Very important for our consideration over here is what is called the renin angiotensin or drawn axis or system Raas system.

It is dependent on sympathetic innovation. Effectors are.

Atrial naturally tick peptide. Uh, antidiuretic hormone.

You know, other Euro Latin that I'm not going to talk about so, so much.

But if we zoom in on our Bowman's, uh, capsule over here on our glomerulus.

Right. We have the afferent arterial, meaning our blood flow is coming in from the renal artery,

and we have our efferent arterial, and the blood is coming out.

Right. All that that that filtering is happening over here at this finish.

Straight at endothelium. Now cut through here is a part of that tubular system.

And in that junction close to this, um, close to the, to the glomerulus, we have these cells that we call the jeux,

the glomerular cells or glomerular meaning close to the, the mirrorless.

Just because there's a juxtaposition between. Right.

And these cells can sense both osmolarity at the level of the macula denser.

But they can also measure the distention of the pressure over here.

And we also have sympathetic innervation over here.

So one of the things that you can do that the amaryllis does over here in the

nephron does it does doesn't just affect urine and sodium and glucose handling,

but it's also sensing mechanism. And it's a very powerful sensing mechanism for blood pressure over here.

Right. But also for content of what is being filtered in terms of the osmolarity and, and sodium and, uh.

Concentration over here. So.

If the baroreceptors in the Jackson glomerular, uh.

Um, apparatus. So these instructs the cells sends a drop in pressure.

The rent in production is going up. Here's the data.

If you're above about 90 minutes of pressure, right.

That's where we usually operate. The run and production run and release very low.

Right. But moment that you stop to start to drop below that you have a dose dependent increase in the random production.

And Ren and release. So Ren was released from the kidney as a function of the mean arterial pressure.

Um, well, in this particular case, it in eight countries.

Dogs. So at the level of the macular denser if they if the macular denser cells sends a low sodium chloride um delivery to the macular denser.

Running. Production is also going up, meaning blood pressure is low or sodium chloride concentration low.

Running. Production going up. So we going back over here.

And then finally, I think that's finally. If the renal sympathetics are going up.

So meaning that we have a global response, a global response in the sympathetics urine in production will also go up.

If there's a global stimulus that says our pressure is low, right?

Or we're in a fight or flight, you know, state, then the rent in production is also going up.

So why is rent an important renin release from the kidneys over here?

The liver produces an enzyme called angiotensin agen N6, and Sinjin converts run into angiotensin one.

In the lungs. Is an Ace.

Angiotensin converting enzyme converts nutrient tension one to angiotensin two.

And angiotensin two has multiple effects, one of which is that it effects has effects on the brain to release ADH,

antidiuretic hormone diuresis, loss of fluid, and diuresis.

You hold on to fluid. Right. So you want to bring fluid back up.

Meaning that if the kidneys senses stress, meaning low pressure or low sodium chloride.

Delivery. It releases renin, and one of the effects is the release of antidiuretic hormone that acts on the kidneys itself to reduce sodium excretion.

And to to reduce water excretion.

Another effect of angiotensin two is on the adrenal glands, or supra.

Renal grants. Releases aldosterone, and aldosterone also has a powerful effect on the um.

Uh, on the kidneys to reduce, uh, output of water.

Thank you sir. So last slide before the break.

Let me say yeah. Last maybe two more.

So actions of engine tension to hang on to salt and hang on to water on the kidney, increase reabsorption and proximal tubule.

Increase the efferent resistance so that the glomerular filtration and the renal plasma flow go down.

Increase of aldosterone. So you're increasing the sodium chloride reabsorption in the thick ascending lobe the uh collecting duct.

And uh, this uh, descending the descending uh.

Two, bro. Brain. You increase ADHD, uh, secretion, you increase the sense of thirst can be very powerful that you actually take in more.

And at the level of the arterial system, you have a powerful increase in vascular resistance, and that leads to an increase in blood pressure.

All of this leading to volume retention. And an increase in blood pressure.

All right. So that was my crash course in renal physiology as applied to the cardiovascular system.

And before we take the break over here, there's many more sensors of environmental stimuli, external environments, real or perceived pain.

Very powerful sympathetic stimulus. Right.

If someone comes to the emergency department, the heart rate is high. Right?

Could just be because they're really in intense pain. Temperature.

Environmental stimuli. Stimuli interpreted by the cortex.

Real or imagined anxiety. You might be in a life threatening position, or you might imagine that you be in life threatening position.

The response can be the same, right?

Anger, fear, and so on. So higher cortical functions can also affect the cardiovascular effects or the cardiovascular autonomic.

Primarily here. We're interested not in these kinds of things, but in the closed loop control mechanisms that maintain blood pressure homeostasis.

All right. Let's take a ten 15 minute break.

Have some bagels come back. All right.

Um. We're.

Close to the end. So information from the environment as interpreted by our cortex, uh, can also significantly affect our cardiovascular state.

We've talked about all things over here except for the control logic.

And that is an enigma, right?

We don't know what the brain optimizes. Why particular blood pressure value is optimal, how it measures or how it senses.

We know, but what what the brain integrates. And, um, clearly getting information from all over the body and what that optimization function is.

Uh, we really don't have a clue, right. And that is where obviously these little feedback control loops and models fail.

Um, but they're really effective, uh, because they allow us, um, to.

Uh, to conceptualize the behavior and to come up with very good short term sort of models that that recreate the short term.

Um. Uh, behavior of the system.

So now that that shouldn't stop us.

So it doesn't stop us from from trying to figure out what it is and and doing these kinds of implementations in order to compare then simulation and,

and, and experiment. So one thing we've talked about over here is model of cardiovascular control that takes into account the fluid balance over here.

Now you could be a graduate student. You want to work in the space of cardiovascular control.

And this you come to your supervisor after, you know, your first half year of studying this thing,

and you come up with this and you show this to your supervisor and say, here's my model grand model of the cardiovascular system.

Say, well, you know, a little Bobby, this is nice, but there are quite a lot of things missing, right?

So we have sort of remodeling. We know that there's baroreceptors.

We know that there's arterial stretch receptors. We know venous receptors.

Why don't you go back to your desk and, you know, think a little harder.

So a little Bobby goes to the desk, thinks a little harder, goes, you know, hits, hits the the lower levels that count, wear library tools,

you know, look through an old dusty box and of physiology half a year later comes back with something that looks like that.

Right. So we still recognize our old loop over here.

Right. Means systemic pressure. We are, uh, subtracting the right atrial pressure over here.

The venous return. Right. We multiply it all prefer resistance.

But then this adaptation over here we have chemoreceptors. Very receptors.

Right. We have, uh, adaptation of those receptors.

If you actually stretch them for too long, they desensitize little Bobby really happy.

Right. Brought all of this together. We have right atrial pressure as a function of cardiac output over here goes to the supervisor.

And the supervisor looks at this and says yeah this is very nice. But with, you know, your erythropoietin system, right.

Where is uh, you know, blood flow through the bone and all of this.

Right. So little Bobby is ticked off. It's the library heart and this is what he comes back with.

Right. So here we have the kidneys and excretion. We have thirst and drinking.

We have antidiuretic hormone control.

We have what do we have electrolytes in cell water tissue fluids heart hypertension deterioration red cell viscosity.

Right. Of course you can build these kinds of models, but they provide very little insight.

You can run these and make predictions.

You can run these to actually tune parameters and and do what if scenarios.

And that what guidance did this is from from other guidance. Some of you might know the guy in physiology textbook the same fame right.

That's what they did in the late 70s.

And they actually came stumbled upon a very interesting mechanism of essential hypertension through this modeling exercise.

Right. But it provides zero insight into sort of the system level behavior that we are trying to develop over here.

So the way in the end that we want to look at this is very simple.

We have arterial stretch receptors and we have these venous receptors which we also cardiopulmonary receptors.

Right. When they stretch. They indicate high pressure.

If they relax, they indicate low pressure. And then there are some.

Optimization, some impulse response function, some transfer function, so to speak,

over here that says if this is firing more, then there is a sympathetic outflow that might be activated over here.

And there's a parasympathetic outflow that might be activated over here.

Way that we think about the parasympathetic outflow zeroth order only affecting heart rate.

Great only. No peripheral resistance. No venous tone.

No contractility. Heart rate only.

Sympathetic outflow affects the heart rate, contractility, resistance in venous tone the way that we've described it.

Okay. Now. In turn, those effective mechanisms will then affect the aortic arch pressure.

Right. That's where we have arterial barrier reflex sensors called sinus pressure.

Over here and the right to a pressure.

And that is the close loop that we're thinking about in terms of the primary neural control of the cardiovascular system.

Now we also know and we've just seen that the stretch receptors on the right hand side.

Can also affect the sympathetics. And thereby effect the kidney.

This here happens on the order of seconds. If you talk about the autonomic nervous system.

Kidneys. Minutes. Two hours. Okay.

So we have control mechanisms that are closed loop acting on very different timescales.

So. What about that control logic? Well, we can look at what the sinus node gives into the brain.

So the efferent nerve traffic going to the brain.

And we can look at the post ganglion IC sympathetic nerve traffic coming out of the sympathetic nervous system.

So what's going into the brain and what's coming out and going to the heart itself.

Right. We are not we have no clue what's happening in between over here.

Right. But we usually have sort of these sigmoidal response curves, meaning that if the mean pressure in the carotid sinus.

Is, let's say, close to 100 or 90mm of mercury.

The relative impulse frequency scale to a maximum is fairly low.

Anyway, we're operating as normal. Um.

Uh, mean carotid sinus pressure. We have a residual nerve traffic that's going to the brain through the sinus nerve.

Right? And if we're operating at that sinus pressure over here, the relative impulse frequency in the post ganglion IC nerve is fairly high.

Meaning what is low over here? It's high on the effective side.

I didn't want it's high over here. It's low on the effective. So that's sort of that input output relationship that we're talking about.

So if the mean and pressure sinus pressure is going up.

Right, then the nerve traffic going to the brain is high.

But the north traffic going into the periphery is low,

meaning that you're in a relatively sympathetically depressed, which makes sense of the pressure.

It's high over here. You want your heart rate to be high? No.

You want your resistance to be high? No. You want your stone to be high?

No. You want to be in a state where you're rolling off on the sympathetic.

Because you're already in a very high state if you're in a very low state. You want to be maximally sympathetic, stimulated, stimulated.

So somewhere in the brain, there's a flip between what is being sent up and what is being sent down.

Right. That's in the brainstem.

Medulla oblongata. We know where the locations are of the autonomic nervous system and the centers of the of the, of the at the brainstem level.

Right. How that function, you know, appears you can look at a synaptic transmission studies.

Right. But what make makes us operate at that particular point I don't think anybody knows.

Right. And why does it actually maybe shift over time as we age?

Why does it, you know, actually get upregulated when we exercise?

We can conjecture, but we don't quite know the mechanisms of it.

We don't quite know. So. But in the end, we don't need to know those mechanisms to understand the system level behavior.

So here's something that I've alluded to in that talk to Tedros alluded to already.

Which is the carotid sinus massage. Right. So here is your massaging a rabbit or the rabbit was massage.

Did the carotid sinus or what you did in the rabbit is that you go in and you don't do that at home.

Uh, so you press in and then you wiggle right in.

What you're trying to do is you're trying to stretch the stretch receptors at the carotid sinus.

Right. We have the egg over here very compressed, but we have heart rate.

We have blood pressure, and we have flow measured at the femoral artery. So not cardiac output, but it's at the at the femoral artery.

But what we want to focus on is really the heart rate response and the blood pressure response.

Right. So what happens when you do a carotid sinus massage?

You're going in there, right? And you're just massaging the carotid sinus.

What you're doing is you're stretching the stretch receptors. Right.

Now that's those stretch receptors. When they get stretched, they send a signal to the brain that says, I'm sensing a hypertensive stimulus.

Right. What's the system level response to a hypertensive stimulus?

Right. You think that you're operating over here, right?

Normally, you're operating over here. You think that you're operating over here.

You have sympathetic withdrawal and you have parasympathetic increase.

So what happens here is while you're massaging the carotid sinus of that rabbit.

Heart rate immediately decreases. First vaguely mediated and then secondarily sympathetically mediated.

So very rapid parasympathetic withdrawal for the sympathetic, you know, withdrawal over here.

Sorry parasympathetic stimulation. Sympathetic withdrawal. Right.

And then when you stop right. Hydrate.

Or maybe it stopped over here. Hydrate pops right back up.

What happens to blood pressure? But pressure goes down, right?

Because you're fooling the arterial reflex into thinking that there is a hypertensive stimulus.

But massaging this. When did we bring up the carotid massage?

I think we brought it up when we talked about. Uh, supraventricular tachycardia.

Right. And people and learning how to actually do a little bit of carotid massage to have a vagal outflow to slow down the heart.

What happens when you actually have this vagal response on the AV node?

Right. You're reducing conduction velocity through the AV node.

Are you reducing conduction velocity through the myocardial cells?

Ventricular myocardium. Right. And you're trying to get the heart out of that rapid rhythm.

All right. So one way to actually try to get out. Of course you don't want to do that at home unattended.

Right. Because your blood pressure would tank if you do it on both sides.

Right. And you don't want to do it in such a way that you would keel over.

All right, but very effective when done right. Not always easy to find.

The carotid arch of the of the rabbit. Okay.

So let me get back to the very beginning of our control lecture here.

Uh, two lectures or so ago. Right. This was you this morning getting up from a lying position.

Slight increase in blood pressure as you as you contract your muscles.

Right. We'll talk about the Wells Fargo maneuver in a second. Then you stand up and you relax your muscles.

All right. Blood is essentially starting to pool in the dependent vasculature.

At the level of the heart. Your blood pressure drops by about 20, 25mm of mercury.

So at the level of the brain, right, it's even lower. Heart rate immediately shoots up.

Right, leading to a turnaround over zero blood pressure.

And equilibration, at least for the first three minutes, at a level higher than your baseline.

Now. If you observe astutely as you do, you say, wait, wait a second.

This is blood pressure, homeostasis wise and blood pressure coming back down exactly where it was before.

Isn't that the whole point? Blood pressure is slightly above baseline.

In a standing position. Actually, quite a it's actually quite correct.

When you're lying down and you measure blood pressure at the level of the heart, let's say in the middle of the line, if you're exactly.

You want to be really accurate, right? If you're lying down.

Whether you have the blood pressure of the hand over here or over here. Doesn't matter over here.

Right? We have no gravitational gradients across the main body axis.

But as you actually tilting up, right, if you keep the blood pressure at the level of the heart.

But if you really want to regulate your blood pressure at the level of the brain.

What's happening to the level of the heart? High blood pressure has to rise a little bit in order to maintain that blood pressure constant.

Turns out that this blood pressure is not exactly constant. Right.

So it's not that if we were to actually keep our blood pressure over here,

that it would exactly stay the same before and after tilting before and after standing somewhere in between.

And probably has to do with the fact that you have sensors at the level of the heart and the level of the brain, and both get integrated.

Yeah. Yeah.

Very good question. I'm not aware of any wearable device that accurately measures blood pressure.

Not of any. Zero. Right.

So what you can have is you can have, you know, cuff devices like this that inflate the same way that you have a cuff over here, like asymmetrically.

So that's number one. It's like $1 billion industry.

Apple is trying to do it. Samsung is trying to do it. They scooped up a bunch of our graduates trying to do it.

You can go online and say that Apple thinks that they are one year away or they are.

And then you say that the timeline has shifted. Right. Do you think it's accurate.

Mhm. Yeah. So they're devices out there. But your bigger question is the following.

Absolutely depends. I do remember the exercise that we did over here in the exercise.

You know to bring this down. So one thing you could do and what people have thought about is to calibrate this is to say.

All right. I mean, I hold this at the level of the heart, right?

And then if I know I can measure my my distance over here, I can just bring this up.

Right. And I know what that difference could be.

Right. So that's one way that people have tried to calibrate.

It's like I'm. Not. It makes sense, but not really accurate to the level that we want.

But yeah. Variable devices for blood pressure measurement depends on where you are, where your measurement point is, right?

We always think of blood pressure as a reference to the level of the heart.

The cuff is that the break in where you are pretty much at right atrium level.

Right. That's what we want. Okay. Good question.

All right. So this increase over here, as I said,

has to do with the fact that the input from the carotid sinus and likely the input from the carotid sinus in the aortic arch,

is somehow integrated at the level of the brain and really get regulating it somewhere in between.

It's not perfectly regulated here. When you do the measurements, it's not perfectly regulated over here.

But if you keep your blood pressure, your, your, your sensor at the level of the heart in the upright position,

you have about a 3 to 4 to five millimeters of mercury rise in arterial blood pressure.

And that, as I said, probably has to do with the fact that the cardiovascular control system tries to regulate something in between.

All right. Okay.

So we can also look at tilting in the context of our cardiac output venous return curve.

Right. So the way to think about this is as I said is what is the initial insult.

Right. And then what does this lead to in terms of the cardiovascular control mechanisms.

So if we suddenly stand up let's say forget about control mechanisms.

If we suddenly put someone upright and we say there is no cardiovascular control.

The main way to model this in the context, or to to rationalize this in the context of what we've learned over here, is to say, wait.

So in a gravitational field, you essentially tilt.

Upright essentially amounts to an increase in zero pressure feeling well, meaning that your translocated blood from the descending to the.

Um, zero pressure, filling volume. It's essentially it's akin to a blood loss, right?

Because you're standing up, you're pooling a lot of blood in, in your legs.

And that would be then leading.

Without control mechanisms just by itself to a reduction in the mean.

Systemic pressure. Right now your vote is actually going up.

Your vote is going up. That means your numerator is going down.

That means that your mean systemic pressure is going down, which means that that intersection point over here, right, is going down.

Akin to a to a blood loss. Right.

What happens on your cardiac output side on your heart lung pumping unit side?

Right in the uncontrolled state. Nothing. Right.

And the uncontrolled said nothing. Because.

Heart rate doesn't change, doesn't have a reason to change because you're changing your gravitational field, right?

Contractility doesn't change. Now. Now we know what the insult is and how the cardiovascular system responds to initial insult, right?

It would go from a state cardiac output state like this over here to a cardiac output state like this over here in the uncontrolled state.

Resistance. Still the same, right? All we've said is that the zero pressure filling volume is actually going up.

That's our moral foothold, right? So what happens to blood pressure?

Cardiac output is going down. Resistance. The same blood pressure has to go down.

So arterial blood pressure is going down. So now that we know that there are two blood pressure as a consequence of the initial insult is going down.

And now we can think through what happens with the control system,

how the arterial battery flex and the cardiopulmonary flex or the heroic arch reflects the correct sinus reflex.

They sense a low blood pressure. So what happens? Heart rate is going up.

Contractility is going up. Venous tone is going down.

Venus tone is going up. Your pressure fitting volume is going down and resistance is going up.

So what happens now in response to this is that now your slope is going up.

Offset is going up. Your. PMS is going up again, right?

And your resistance is changing. So your slope is changing.

The important point of emphasis is we never overcompensate.

We never come out as a response to an insult.

With a supra normal cardiac output. We don't.

We can get close to our reference point in blood pressure, right?

We can get close to the normal cardiac output where we don't overcompensate.

Meaning that we would go from a point that might be over here, right?

An uncontrolled state over here to one that's closer to the state that we have over here.

Right. But we never get above that point. Meaning that if the initial insult takes us in mean systemic pressure from here to here,

the compensated state now with all the control mechanisms in place would get us somewhere in between.

It would never cross over to the other side. Okay.

Yeah. Correct.

But in a. In the control set because now you have sympathetic outflow.

Right. And that affects the heart. And it affects the peripheral circulation.

On the heart it changes resistance. It changes heart rate and contractility.

On the peripheral circulation side, it changes venous tone and vascular resistance.

All right. So the four things that change PMS offset over here.

Resistance slope over here. Heart rate slope over here.

Contractility offset over here. Those are the four things.

Those are the four effectors that we have, right? And what if you superimposed blood loss on a tilt?

So now you're tilting your students and then you say, well, if you're not quite finished yet, then let me actually take a pint of blood, right.

The effects are compounded because now you have an effective hemorrhage or, you know, blood loss through the tilt, right?

But then you have a real blood loss on top of that. Right.

But the game that you're playing is exactly the same. What's the initial insult?

What's the what's the initial? Um. Uh, which parameters of our system are initially affected?

What is that effect doing to cardiac output? How is that translating to blood pressure?

And what is then the reflex response of both the arterial reflex and, uh, the.

Yeah, yeah. Terrible reflex in the cardiopulmonary. Okay.

So what happens in these kind of tests when autonomic failure occurs.

So your autonomic don't function as as, uh, you wish.

Well here is the full transient response as well. You have the blood pressure response.

You have the heart rate response. You have a percent change in stroke volume, percent change in cardiac output.

And total peripheral resistance is unchanged. So if you have autonomic failure or failure of the autonomic system to respond right, you.

See that every change in posture can be a very significant challenge to your system.

Total peripheral resistance essentially constant. I'm not adapting at all.

To the change, you know, to a blood pressure, cardiac output dropping by about 50%.

Right stroke volume dropping by 50%. Heart rate essentially constant.

All right, so these people have to get up slowly.

They, you know. Learn maneuvers in order to to, uh, to counteract the blood pressure drop over here.

And, you know, you can also have circulating catecholamines that that act on a longer time scale,

that over a longer time scales help blood pressure to come back up.

Right. But in this kind of scenarios, every change in posture can be potentially a significant challenge to the system.

Now, the other maneuver that we've talked about previously is that of about salvage maneuver, which is the training maneuver.

It's like weightlifting, right?

You do this, you tense your your abdomen, right, you tense, you know, you try to exhale forcefully against the closed, glorious right.

And that has a very characteristic change in arterial blood pressure.

And then heart rate, arterial blood pressure, usually not measured in the clinic.

But you can actually measure the heart rate response with a simple ECG and and a heart rate, you know, output.

Right. So normal actual blood pressure over here.

Right. And then you do this training maneuver.

And that increases your intra thoracic pressure, right?

Meaning that you're actually pressing down on all the vessels inside of your abdomen and inside of your thorax.

Right. That increase in pressure, that outside squeeze is transmitted immediately onto as a DC increase on the actual blood pressure waveform.

Right. You see, when you actually do this right, your blood pressure shoots up immediately.

Right both of the carotid sinus and the aortic arch.

So at that level, your heart rate goes down. Cause your blood pressure just shot up.

But it shot up because you actually squeezing on on everything in your thorax right now,

when you do that and your, your, your intra thoracic pressure is shot up, right?

What do you what do you think happens to the vessels entering your your thorax?

They're collapsing, right? Because you have a massive outside pressure, right?

You're truly collapsing these vessels. Heart is still beating, not empty.

But what happens to your stroke volume? You can see that the pulse amplitude is getting smaller and smaller and smaller.

Stroke volume. Get it going down right. Because your heart is beating, but it's not filling effectively, right?

As a consequence of this decline in in in blood pressure, your heart rate is going up.

Right until the point comes. We say you let go.

Right. You have an immediate drop in blood pressure, right?

Very low. Uh, stroke volume. A very low pulse.

Pressure over here. Now, you release that pressure that's squeezed and that collapsed the vessels entering the thorax.

Right. What happens to your venous return?

Right now you have all of this blood that's backed up right outside the thorax that rushes back to your heart.

What happens to your stroke volume? Increase is significantly, right?

Because now you're stretching the heart. You have a lot of venous return. Right.

Blood pressure comes down. Heart rate plummets.

Yeah. Yeah.

So scuba diving. You can't stay that long downstairs, right?

But there are people that that sort of chronically have high intra thoracic pressure or a of chronically, but let's say oboe players, right.

Players like French horn players that have very, um, uh, very high, um, uh, that have to generate a lot of pressure and very small mouthpieces.

Right. They're the, the, the, the, um, the influence that I know of is mostly on the I,

it's the intraocular pressure that could go up because your intracranial pressure goes up.

I don't know whether there's any effect known of these kinds of plays on the cardiovascular system.

Right. Because you don't hold it for long.

It's really just that you have these bursts where you're going up right now, scuba diving, uh, you have a positive pressure ventilation.

Right. So it's not that you're actually squeezing down what you're doing is you actually have your BCD,

your buoyancy control device, and your your breathing air in.

So you're actually expanding, but you're also expanding against the, the, uh, it's like positive pressure ventilation,

but you're actually balancing the pressure that the outside world the C gives you

with the pressure that you actually that the buoyancy control device gives you.

So there is a effect on venous return right through the positive pressure ventilation.

But it's not like the squeeze that you get in. Um, uh, in freediving for example.

So there you can really collapse things, right? Because you don't have, uh, the positive airway pressure.

And that's where they sometimes I mean, these,

these people who would just drop down right there comes a point where, you know, you're positive buoyancy is gone.

Right. And you just because it's so collapse that you're essentially dropping like a rock.

And that's where people hold records and die in the process.

Okay. All right, let's go. Maneuver an auto autonomic failure.

Very simple. Bedside or in office?

A response where you say, well, you know, do this maneuver and we can actually, you know.

See whether your heart increases, decreases heart rate increases or decreases.

And, um, if you have a blood pressure measurement system, you can also slap that on, but I don't know, make feel it over here as well.

You have these increases in swings in blood pressure. You have zero heart rate response.

And of course, anything in between can be blunted. Right. But while the maneuver a simple maneuver.

Also, um, again, to get you out of, um, tachycardia is because at this point you have massive vagal outflow, right?

Heart rate goes up, but then it plummets significantly at this moment.

And you have significant slowing down of the action potential through the ventricular myocardium,

through the AV, you know, and that can also help you get out of out of attack.

Attack here with Mia. So maybe a couple more things to show you how.

How we can understand various, uh, adaptation of behaviors.

Um, muscular exercise. This is very busy.

So this is just for fun. Um, nothing that you should commit to memory, but what happens in exercise, right when we have sudden onset exercise?

So this is seconds after the onset of exercise.

So the first thing that happens in exercise is really that we have a massive increase in the mean systemic or mean circulatory pressure.

Uh, why is that? Because when we start to exercise, we do exactly what I just mentioned is that you start to do what's right.

You sit on a bicycle ergometer order to sit there and to start pedaling.

Right, you have to tense your your abdomen. Right.

If you if you start sort of lifting things or you start on a treadmill, you also have to tense your,

your abdomen a lot of splanchnic venous compliance if you press from the outside.

Right. You mean systemic pressure shoots up. It is essentially the opposite of that tilt.

You have an outside squeeze and the mean systemic pressure, you know, shoots up over here right now a little, uh,

so and then cardiac output also increases immediately because when you actually do the squeeze, you have an immediate increase in venous return.

That immediate increase in venous return stretches the sarcomeres.

And we know that when we actually increase the preload to the heart, it increases the maximum tension it can generate.

And therefore a passive mechanical response to the increase in in filling

pressure essentially is an increase in stroke volume increase in cardiac output.

Right. That's sort of this little increase over here is just the passive increase that you have over here right now.

You also see here that it says that the resistance increases.

And that has to also to do with the squeeze in the immediate mechanical squeeze on the vasculature.

We say if you have a significant outside squeeze right,

then very immediately you might actually have an increase in resistance simply because you're you're pressing down on these vessels now.

As your sympathetics get activated, slowly your heart rate increases.

This is seconds after the onset of exercise. Your heart rate increases.

Right. And over the course of maybe 1015 20s your resistance.

Starts to decrease. Right. That is the resistance to exercising muscle over here.

And then heart rate increases. Right.

Venous venous tone increases. We have mean circulatory pressure going further up in systemic pressure.

Right. Your cardiac output goes up. So these are all sort of the mechanisms that we can understand understanding the fundamental, uh,

you know, mechanisms of, of muscular exercise and the metabolic needs that go along with that.

And what would that look like in our cardiac output and, and venous return curves.

So our state A over here is our, our uh reference date.

Right. The immediate squeeze on the, on the abdominal um vessels is an increase in mean systemic pressure.

Increase in resistance and no change on the cardiac output curve.

Right. So we going from A to B. That's just passive mechanics.

Then we have our sympathetics kicking in, right?

We have further increase in mean systemic pressure because of a reduction in zero pressure filling volume.

All right. We have an increase in resistance to so a decrease in resistance to the exercising

muscles and maybe an increase in resistance to the other vascular territories.

But you then also see that you have an increase in heart rate.

And an increase in contractility as a reflex response to that.

All right. So we're going from a state that's a B to one that C. So now we we're about eight liters per minute.

Right. And if we're now maximally exercising and our um.

Our exercising muscles are maximally vaso dilated so they can be delayed anymore.

We have the lowest level of total peripheral resistance that we can attain, and that slope goes up quite significantly.

All other things being equal, we're going to stay d over here okay.

Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah, that's part of it. All right. Uh, so.

So this is not this is not a passive. Sorry. That's a good question.

Thank you for asking. So this is not a passive response to an insult, right.

Let's say you have a stab wound and you have blood loss. That's an insult.

And you will not have a supra physiological response to that. You do not have a blood pressure that goes higher because of the physiological here.

You're actually the brain is overriding the feedback control mechanism.

What you're actually saying is you're exercising right, and you are in a state where the exercise right massively vasodilators and the and

and the higher order response is responsible for the sort of the increase from,

you know, A to B to C to D, it's not a passive response of the feedback control mechanism.

And in these people or in people who are in, if you are exercising, you would actually you would actually measure an increase in blood pressure.

So it's also an evidence that it's not a passive feedback control mechanism.

So once you actually massively raise a dilated and you continue to exercise,

the only way that you can actually squeeze more flow through your peripheral circulation is by increasing.

Arterial blood pressure by increasing the driving flow. Right.

The driving pressure. And the body does that.

You can actually see it that the blood pressure stays more or less constant.

And until you get to a certain threshold, then the blood pressure actually goes up because you can no longer place it on.

That's it. Get your out a little early today.

But the point is. Oh. Huh? Not so fast.

Unless you don't want to hear anything about the exam, then that's fine. Uh.

All right, so, um. Next Thursday.

Right. One sheet sheet you can put on that sheet whatever you want.

Eight and a half by 11 letter size. Both sides if you want.

Yes. No magnification devices allowed.

Right. So you have to be able to read it with your own eyes or your own prescription glasses.

No loops. All right. The neurocognitive mechanism,

or the newer cognitive exercise of generating the cheat sheet is probably a lot more important than needing it during the exam.

But we also don't want you to remember formulas, right?

So put on it whatever you want. If a poem prepares you for the exam, put on your poem, right?

If it's anatomy, if it's physiology, if anything, we're not going to collect this.

It's up to you. You can write whatever you want. Number one. Number two.

Probably good to bring a calculator. Right.

If we ask you for a number, we would love to see the right units.

If you don't get the right units or if you get something that's 5000l a minute, probably not.

Right? If you're running out of time, at least let us know that you know that it's not right.

That is helpful, right? Uh, in terms of what are we going to cover everything up until pretty much now?

Right. We'll post another problem set this afternoon. That's because Professor Stools is teaching on Thursday, right?

I think that's, that was was that the undertone at any rate.

So we'll post another problem set this week. And we'll either take a former exam so that you can work through these things.

Right. Or we're going to have other sort of practice exams for you.

You can negotiate with Rachel to see whether she's willing and available to have a review session for, for you guys.

Okay. I wanted to extract some collateral for you, but.

Uh, the piece I do probably next Tuesday. No no, no.

So we'll stop here. Right. We'll stop here. And but but here's the thing.

One more. One more comment. Right. There's a few things that we've that we've emphasized over and over and over again, right.

So right now the important thing is the basics. Just make sure that you look through the problem sets.

You look through what we've covered over here. We want to make sure right now that the basics are down,

and that you have an opportunity to think that through and to, to, uh, to tell us that you do.

Okay. So don't go overboard. Look at the things that we emphasize and the kinds of things that we ask you to do to cover in the problem sets.

All right. Thanks.

