[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
I. All right.

Good morning. No no no no no no no no.

Right. This kind of lethargy will not be tolerated.

So we do this again. Good morning. Good morning. That is how it shall be going forward.

Okay. All right. We are all here. We are all oriented. My name is Thomas Heldt.

As Doctor Stultz introduced me last time, I my distinct pleasure to be leading much of the first block of this class.

Um, we'll be talking today about various aspects of, um, hemodynamics, cardiac cycle, a little bit of review of cardiac anatomy,

because some of you might not have seen this in as much depth as the one students have.

Uh, before we get started, I want to make a couple of statements.

Number one, the reading is on the first slide.

It's also in your on canvas.

Now, uh, much of the reading that we assign, uh, we, uh, assume that you will do this either ahead of time or in time, right?

Meaning that you don't fall behind too much. Some of the reading that we will assign, we will not cover in class.

So, for example, today we'll talk about heart zones as one is to S3, S4.

In this part of the class. In this block, the first block, we will not talk much about murmurs.

Do not talk about regurgitation, systolic murmurs, these kinds of things.

It's in your book. So throughout the class, the first block, we will occasionally assign reading that we will not explicitly cover here,

but that we will expect you that over time you will read so that by the time we talk about heart failure,

the time we talk about valvular heart disease, you've caught up with it.

Okay. If you have questions about any of that material, let us know. All right.

Yeah. Indeed.

Because. So it should be listed now on canvas like this.

We will come up with a detailed list of all the dates. Right.

So, um, so that you have the list ahead of time.

Right. We try to keep it to a minimum. And that brings me to the second topic, which is the homework assignments.

So we posted the homework. It's on canvas. Um, we'll come back to that at the end of the class when, you know, if I,

if I still have a little bit of time left at the end to go through the problems, the way that we structured the homework assignments is again.

Um, not because we want to keep you busy.

We know that you are. Uh, but for you to actually engage with the material.

You can work together. You can work on teams perfectly fine.

Just hand in your own material. Right?

Or everybody needs to hand in one copy so it can be the, uh, um, the result of collaboration, which is encouraged.

Um, but we have to have one, uh, problem, uh, problem set per person.

Okay. All right. So.

With this. Um, let's get started.

Doctor sorts last time, talked about cardiac anatomy briefly, and this would be a quick review for many of you.

Um, but we do want to talk about various aspects, uh, to set the stage for some other things that we'll talk about today.

Um, this is really not the best lighting. Let's see.

This is better. All right. If you were to crack open the chest and you were to expose the heart and everything that's in,

you know, in the chest over here, this is what you would see, right?

We have a pedestrian organ over here on either side of what undoubtedly is the most important organ in the body, right?

The chamber that's the most anterior is the.

It's the right ventricle. Right. It's the right ventricle.

So the vessel that is the most interior of the great vessels that comes off of the right ventricle is the.

I know that you guys know it, so don't be shy. You all know each other.

And we will know each one of you very soon, right?

So there are no trick questions here, okay. What do we call this structure?

Right, Oracle. Exactly right. Three vessels return blood to the right atrium.

These are. Yes.

So inferior vena cava, superior vena cava, coronary sinus, upper body, lower body and from the corner circulation itself.

Okay. All right. So we have the great resources. We have this, this this big thing which is the.

Descending aorta, aortic root, ascending order into the aortic arch.

And then we have big vessels coming out. Turns out that if you actually.

How many of you have actually seen open heart surgery.

So when they actually when you actually open the chest, it doesn't, it doesn't, you know, come neatly colored like this, right.

It also doesn't come with, with arrows to the, to these various structures to get you oriented.

So when you actually open the, the, the chest, first thing that you have to do, you have to get oriented.

We slice the heart open across the plain that we see over here.

Right? We see. The right ventricle over here.

You see the left ventricle over here. Right now many of you have dissected a calf heart, I think, in anatomy or in pathology.

Right? So, you know, these various structures.

We already talked about the mitral valve, the tricuspid valve, the mitral valve over here, papillary muscles over here, cord attending and so on.

Now one thing that is apparent immediately is the wall thickness.

Right. Thin wall on the right side.

Comparatively thick wall. On the left. Why?

What's the pressure that we generate under normal circumstances? Over here in the right, in the left ventricle.

Systolic 120. What's the end? Diastolic pressure.

Doctor. Saul's. Sorry. The entire solid ventricular pressure.

All right. 120 over ADC arterial pressure.

We'll talk about that right here. We're talking about the ventricular pressure 120 over five over eight, not eight not over.

It's systolic 120 and diastolic pressure of the right ventricle of the left ventricle about eight.

So compare this to about 20 systolic over here right.

And five and diastolic. We'll clarify some of these things right.

So wall thickness is related to the, um.

Uh, to the pressure that's being generated. And we'll quantify that a little bit.

What I don't like about this here is that when you actually go from sort of the valvular,

the region of the heart of the heart, down towards the apex, uh, you do not see a change in the wall thickness.

Now, when you did your dissections of the calf hearts,

you probably saw something like this where you have the court attendant over here, you have the mitral valve leaflet.

Over here you have the. Left ventricular free wall over here.

But what you can see over here as you go from the, uh, valvular region of the, um, annulus region of the heart down to at the apex.

The wall is sending out. Right. So what we want to do right now is we want to understand with a simple model of why that is right.

We'll talk about Laplace law of the heart. And what we mean by that is.

So we make an assumption here. We want to relate the pressure that the heart or that a chamber can generate based on the geometry and the, um.

Uh, the what stress can generate. So.

Capitalize. Who should capitalize? So. All right.

So we make an assumption that the heart or the ventricle, not the heart.

The heart. Is. The sphere.

And then we can cut the sphere at the equator.

And what we are trying to establish is what is the relationship between the

pressure that's inside of that spherical ball or heart and the word stress sigma.

So p here is the um is the.

Uh, it's a pressure. You can call it if you want the chamber pressure.

And the units here are as usual, we have sort of fourth area or we have mass.

Per length. And, um.

I don't, uh. Mask to length.

And. Actually leave it like this. I don't know why I have a t squared in there.

I don't want to confuse myself. Sigma is, well, stress. And this is essentially the force per unit area in the wall of the heart.

Right. So this is also force per area. Then we have our capital R over here which is the radius.

Of the chamber. And Dr. is the wall thickness.

So. This is in meters or length scale.

Now. So, ah, is this over here? And.

This over here is Dr. So let me explain what I'm trying to do over here.

Let's take a basketball. Right. For better soccer ball.

Right. The football, what proper terminology would be.

You cut. This thing doesn't expand, right?

You pump it up. At some point in neither expanse.

Sorry. Am I in your way? It neither expands nor does it contract.

Right. So the air that you push in, that actually presses the wall out.

Exerts a pressure on the wall. That is exactly balanced by the force that's generated in the material of the ball.

Right. Now, if you want to understand the forces that are at play over here, we can do it exactly the way that I've just described it.

We can look at what is pushing out and what is sort of pushing in. Right.

But what we can also do is we can make a cut through the equator.

And we're saying a virtual cut through that equator.

And what we can say is that these two halves of that ball are neither flying apart, nor are they collapsing on top of one another.

Right. So the force that is acting on that projected area, then, is pushing the two halves apart.

Has to be balanced by the force that actually push it pulls them together.

Right. So in other words, the force that is acting on this projected area and it's pushing out right,

has to be balanced by the water stress acting on the rim of this chamber that's pulling things back together.

Okay. So that would be our fourth balance.

So what we want to really again what we want to relate is the pressure to Sigma right.

And so we make a few assumptions. We say assume. That VR.

So the thick the wall thickness is very small compared to capital R.

So this is called the thin wall assumption. And then our fourth balance.

Is that what is pushing the two halves?

The part has to be equal to what is pushing, what is sort of pulling the two halves together.

Right? Because when static equilibrium, we're neither expanding nor contracting.

Right. What's pushing us apart is the pressure here acting across this projected area.

Right. So we have p times pi times r squared is equal to.

Now the wall stress that's acting around this rim right.

This is sigma times that area. And because we're making that thin wall assumption we can approximate that area as two pi r d r.

Okay. You can have an outer diameter, you can have an inner diameter.

You can compute that exactly. Right. But since you're making this assumption.

It's essentially a small strip of length of the circumference times the thickness.

Make sense? So some of you might have seen that for a while.

So now what we can then say is that the pressure is related to the well.

Uh, stress is two sigma, the r over, r over.

We can say sigma is equal to p times r.

Over to the are. Sometimes see this way.

You sometimes see that way. Right? R squared goes away with this r over here.

And then you just rearrange. There's a pie somewhere. You know, the pie is actually all sort of drop out.

What does this tell us? Sigma here is a material constant.

Depends on your myocytes. Right. R&R.

Are geometrical constants. Right.

The pressure is whatever the the ventricle can generate.

We'll talk a lot more about this when we talk about heart failure in the clinical part of the blog,

because you can use this law to explain certain types of hypertrophy,

how the heart reacts to either pressure or volume overload kind of relationships.

You could change the radius. You can get a dilated heart.

Or you can change the thickness and you can get a hypertrophy height for the same vest over here and the same.

Pressure. Now, how does this help us? Go back to the previous.

Part. Over here. Now. Right. Left ventricle. Right.

Left ventricle. We could say maybe a spherical assumption.

Can apply right ventricular assist shell that sits around it. Not so much if you want to be fancy.

Knock yourselves out. Go through the real geometry.

Trust me, you'll end up with something very similar. Geometrical factors would be different.

But the fundamental relationship will still hold. Right.

But. What is the what is the, um.

How does this help us explain that?

Towards the apex of the left ventricle. Seems like random buttons.

This is getting thinner. Right.

The assumptions that we can make is that as we go down towards the apex, the radius, the local radius gets smaller and smaller.

Right. So if the local radius gets smaller and smaller, the sigma doesn't change.

Right. To generate the same pressure. Your wall thickness.

Has the luxury of getting smaller. Right.

So when we think about the ventricle and we think about now a true ventricle, not as a sphere but as a sort of ellipsoid of revolution, right.

Oh wall thickness into something like this. Because this radius over here and this way over here are very different.

Okay. So while this is something of a, one could say what we have here, we have to do something quantitative, right?

It does become helpful when we talk about hypertrophy, and it does help us to actually think about, um, how the heart responds.

Okay. All right. This is in your at least for cylindrical part.

This is in your, um, course notes that we've put up.

It's not in the reading of the book, but it's in the course notes that is on the, um, on canvas.

All right? Yeah. What?

So this is we're just looking at a static pressure.

Right now. We could say if we could arrest the heart in any one of these states, it would still hold.

Right now. Yes, you're right that it's a dynamic system.

Right. And pressures that are being generated.

There's some dynamics to it, but it's really more of a of a way to, to think conceptually about it and to relate key parameters.

Okay? Of course. Pressure in the walls, shear stress, the radius. They're all changing.

So as is the wall thickness. Right throughout the cardiac cycle.

Okay. So talking about the wall, the architecture of the wall has fiber orientations.

That depends on the location where you are from endocarditis to.

The heart doesn't contract like this or it doesn't contract like this.

It really contracts like this. Right.

And while you don't need to know the exact detail of the sinus spiral and the deep sinus spiral and the, um, you know,

bulbous spiral and deep bulbous spiral fiber orientation,

what you oughta know is that there is fiber orientation that actually changes throughout the myocardium.

Right.

And that that fiber orientation is important for the contraction, both in the radial direction but also also in the apical sort of valvular direction.

Right. So that the squeezing of the heart is really a torsion.

Along with sort of the longitudinal contraction, but also with the radial contraction.

Details are important if you want to do research in this field, or if you want to become a cardiologist later on.

Yeah. We'll ask doctor thoughts about that.

I'm not aware of any disease that way. You actually have a change in the in the, uh, fiber orientation.

So there are. Zainab.

Is that okay? It's just the orientation.

Right. So you can take a look at this over here. It's the orientation how it actually wraps around and where it inserts.

Right. And what layer of the you know of the distance from endocarditis to apple cardiac epi cardiogram.

This is all myocardium. Same.

It's just that depending on where you are actually if you were to, if you.

So what people have done is they've they fixated hearts. Right.

They did sort of cross sectional slabs of myocardium.

And then they actually looked at the fiber orientation from endocarditis to cardio.

And where do they insert and how do they actually loop around. Now you can do this with MRI actually.

Right. And and reconstruct these fiber orientations.

So it's the diffusion tensor imaging you know, allows you to do this kind of stuff.

Okay. Briefly, the vows we've already covered.

Uh, on Tuesday, we have the atrial ventricular valves.

Right. And we have the full monarch and the aortic valve.

Right. And depending on whether you're a pacifist or a, um.

Thank you. You can be both. I was pointed out to me last year.

You can say that it's either the peace sign or the Mercedes-Benz sign.

I'll leave it up to you to decide. Right. But the important point of emphasis here is normally.

When these valves are open from the outflow tract.

These valves are closed. And vice versa.

Right. So then, instead of filling of the heart. Or instead of ejection of the heart.

Now, the two phases that we'll talk about that are very brief as contraction ice relaxation.

Talk about this a couple of lectures from today. Right.

But filling. Atrioventricular valves are open.

Ejection. Pulmonic aortic valve. They're open.

Right. So this is a filling state of the heart. This is the ejection state of the heart.

Now. Terminology. Probably already know the heart is not a continuous pump, right?

It's not like a faucet that you switch on. Here it comes.

Right. Filling. Ejection. Filling. Injection. Akin to a peristaltic valve.

So with each beat, the heart is giving out an amount of blood.

That amount of blood we call the stroke volume. This is SV and this is in milliliters per.

For a bit. Now.

Do we know how much that is? Adult human heart.

Roughly. Right. Three.

Units. There would be a whale.

Let's do something different. Let's say heart rate. Which you call H.R. usually, or sometimes you call it f a frequency.

And this is in beats per minute. What's your heart rate right now?

60 and 100. It's funny. So I teach the undergraduate quantitative physiology course in here at MIT for the School of Engineering.

In what do we have? We are this spring now, right in the fall.

Right. And I always ask the question. Tell me your heart rate.

All right. And everybody used to do this, right?

What does everybody do now? Then my next question is how does it do that?

So you can think about this. So if we're interested in the cardiac minute volume, the amount of blood the heart is giving out per minute.

Right. That is what we call the cardiac output.

And this cardiac output. It's heart rate times stroke volume.

Milliliters per beat. Times beats per minute. What is the approximate cardiac output as we're sitting here.

So that's seven liters a little high. Well around five liters per minute.

But it is size dependent. So sometimes you see something about cardiac index.

But the cardiac output is normalized by body surface area.

Right. So that is not a perfect it's not a by no stretch of the imagination, even a good normalization for the size.

But you're trying to figure out whether a child or someone of a smaller size

that someone like a bigger size has different cardiac or so here in normal.

Around, you know, 70 beats per minute. This year.

Normal. Around five. Thousand milliliters per minute or five liters per minute.

So what does this leave us for? The stroke volume. Around 70 right.

Is around 70ml. Per beat.

So some of these numbers will get back to 120 over eight.

Arterial pressure. Right. Cardiac output normal baseline.

We would say five liters per minute. Heart rate 60 7080 beats per minute.

So these kinds of normal ranges will become second nature.

Okay. So.

During the ejection, the heart will give out about, um.

70ml. How much is that? Can you reference that to something?

Sorry. All right.

Okay. So. Good cup of coffee.

Five liters per minute. Flow rate. Do you have a sense of what that is?

This much. Okay. So you'll have an opportunity to figure that out in the problem set.

Because one question that will ask you is to measure to the best of your abilities.

Number one, the volumetric flow rate coming out of your kitchen faucet.

And number two, the volumetric flow rate coming out of your bathtub faucet.

Right now, I'll be curious to see the spread of data that shall be presented to us if last year's any indication on that question,

but I think you'd be surprised. Right. So 70ml per per bit.

Now remember that that 70ml is only injected over one third of the cardiac cycle.

Right. Let's say of 60 beats per second one second. Right.

30% of that or one third of that 300 milliseconds. So you're injecting 70ml over 300 milliseconds.

You have a cross-sectional area of about 2 to 3cm².

You can estimate the flow velocity. A 100cm per second.

So these are sort of numbers that, um, are impressive.

Doctor Stoltz has already commented on the coronary circulation over here.

We'll talk a lot more about this when we talk about ischemia. Heart disease.

Right? Suffice it to say, one main corner, left coronary artery, one right coronary artery,

left coronary artery bifurcates in the left end here descending, also known as the lad or the circumflex.

All right. We'll talk about branches that are coming off, you know, in a lot more detail.

We already mentioned that the blood that leaves the heart has to return to the heart.

And what collects the blood from the coronary circulation is the coronary sinus, one of the three vessels that return blood to the heart.

Okay. All the things in the first chapter that I assigned for reading for today is essentially this.

Right. So for some of you, it's review for the member students who haven't gone through anatomy.

Take a look through it. See us if you have questions. Okay.

All right now. We will talk in a lot greater detail, um, about electrophysiology.

And Doctor Terrell is the person who is going to teach you about the pathologies and the, uh, arrhythmias that are associated with it.

Suffice it to say that they are specialized tissue along the sort of hierarchy of the heart that are specialized

in the sense that they can conduct electrical impulses much faster than the rest of the myocardium.

And as Doctor Stolz pointed out on Tuesday that some of these, especially in the what is known as the sign or atrial note.

The atrial ventricular node common bundle of his.

Have the property of auto ethnicity. Now we'll talk a lot more about this when we talk about.

The basic cellular electrophysiology. Or ethnicity means that you have a positive slope in what is known as a phase four of the action potential.

In that if you were to take a voltage measurement across the cellular wall, there's some leakage currents.

You're not constant like in the ventricular myocytes. Once you read a certain reach, a certain threshold potential.

Certain ion channels open up. And you have what is known as an action potential that can then travel down the

conduction pathway and through the common Evernote common bundle of his bundle branches.

And the Purkinje fibers get very efficiently distributed throughout the ventricular

myocardium such that the situation that then leads to the contraction.

Of the ventricular myocytes in the right, and the left ventricle essentially happens at the same time.

Now, the approach that we're taking here through the first few lectures is one of successive refinement of resolution,

meaning that we'll throw probably a lot of information at you right now, but a lot of this will be refined.

We will get into more detail, and we will then exemplify this in the context of pathology in the second part of the course.

Right. But at the beginning we'll have to introduce some terminology.

And we also want to give you a somewhat of an overview of, uh, things to come.

And so that we can sort of tie things back together. Okay. We talked about anatomy.

What's the problem here? Take a look.

Let me know what you think. Yeah.

A patent ductus arteriosus. All right. Yeah.

Yes, that's what ASD stands for. Exactly right.

And you're catching up. You know, you're you're zooming in with perfect focus on all the things that are secondary.

Because there's one label that I skillfully removed.

So that doesn't stare you in the face. Yeah.

The ventricular walls. Yeah, that's a artist's rendition. Who didn't know about Laplace's Law of the heart?

Okay. That is that is also astute observation. Yes.

Your name? Alexi. All right, tell us.

Is that a question or a statement? A very forceful statement indeed.

Yes. So what's the problem?

The aorta and the pulmonary are switched. Again.

Is that a question or a statement? The statement.

Okay. So. What's the problem with this, right.

Aorta. Clearly, this structure over here, right, ought to be coming off of this thing.

This chamber over here. Pulmonary artery. Clearly, this vessel coming off should be coming off of the right ventricle.

Right. So what's the fundamental problem is that oxygenated blood gets returned to the right atrium.

Flowing into the right ventricle. And is returned to the body.

All right. Oxygenated blood is returned to the left atrium into the left ventricle.

Returned to the lungs. Compatible with life.

Now, rather than having two circuits in series.

Right. Right side of the heart. Pumping into. The pulmonary circulation.

Oxygen generation CO2 gets expelled right into the left side of the heart,

going into systemic circulation through the stomach, back to the right heart.

We have two circuits that are independent.

Except for what? What?

Fetal circulation. And you mentioned the patent ductus arteriosus.

Right. And atrial septal defect, which allows us to have.

Crossover. This is called. Have you heard of it?

Not a tetralogy, after all. It's transposition of the great arteries, right?

How do we fix it? Swap the vessels.

Indeed, it's called the switch operation. One of the key things that is so it's it's it is a congenital heart defect, not a very common one.

And it does happen. Right. One of the problems.

I mean, it is an involved procedure. It has to happen very early in life.

I mean, you have to you know, the baby is reliant on the fetal channels to remain open.

All right. And so what you'll have to do is you'll have to switch these vessels.

The real tricky part is that the coronary arteries are also coming off of this thing over here.

Right. And you have to transpose the coronary arteries and vessels being what they are, collapsible tubes.

If you put a little bit too much stress on them, they can actually collapse.

We have to do this very, very delicately to actually transpose the coronary arteries.

Okay. All right. Well done. Good. But we talked about the fetal circulation, which is different from the adult circulation.

But we shall not forget about our prior cells.

Right. So, blood oxygenated, coming from the mother.

Entering the, uh, the fetus through the from the placenta, through the umbilical vein into the inferior vena cava.

What about the pulmonary circulation? Do babies breathe?

Do babies have respiratory effort? Yes they do.

All right. So they are priming their diaphragm. But the vascular resistance going into the lungs.

Lungs collapsed. Right? Very high.

So the amount of blood that would normally be shunted from the right atrium into the right ventricle through the pulmonary circulation.

Very low. However, we have the pheromone valley.

In this case for a right to left shunt.

And we have the ductus arteriosus, also known as ductus battalion, after the Italian anatomist who described it first.

Uh, that shunts blood from the, um.

Uh. You know, pulmonary artery to the aorta. These feeder channels close after birth.

Baby comes out, takes a deep breath in what happens? Sorry.

What happens to the lungs. Sorry, I should be more precise. What happens to the lungs? Lungs inflate.

So that's why the baby has to breathe first. Cry.

Very important. Right? Because what happens is baby takes a deep breath in.

It expands the lung. Right.

Vascular pulmonary vascular resistance drops precipitous.

What's the principle of pressure across a long. I know that you've covered this.

Because. Airway opening pressure mounts.

So lung pressure minus intra thoracic pressure.

Intra thoracic pressure being negative. Right. When you take a deep breath in.

We take atmospheric pressure as baseline or zero, right?

Transmit pressure inside pressure. Minus outside pressure. Positive zero.

Minus minus five. Yeah, they say ten, but it's probably in centimeters of water rather than millimeters of mercury eight centimeters per water.

Centimeters of water is what the pulmonologists talk about. But we know it's millimeters of mercury.

Right now. Lung inflates.

Pulmonary vascular resistance goes way down. Blood flow takes a path of least resistance.

You actually starting to produce a lot. High oxygen tension.

Going through the ductus arteriosus. Starting to constrict smooth muscle constriction.

Pressure differential across the left and right atrium goes in the opposite direction from anabolic losses to adult circulation.

But changes or problems can happen.

We can have a persistent or a atrial septal defect.

You can have ventricular septal defect, you could have ductus arterials, etc.

Close properly and so on. Right. Transposition of the great arteries.

Just being one of the, um, complications.

Uh, or, um. Congenital heart defects that one encounters.

Boston Children's Hospital, obviously one of the leading centers in the world in correcting some of these.

Okay. All right. So much for the anatomy.

We've talked about cardiac output. Let's do a few more things before we take a break.

Here is a diagrammatic representation of the cardiovascular system.

And the reason why I want to show it to you is for variety of reasons.

Number one is that from an engineering perspective.

We can think of the heart as either a current source or a voltage source.

And when we think of it as a current source, we think of it as an organ that gives a constant flow.

It. Right. Five liters per minute.

When we think of it as a pressure source. We think of it as an organ that can maintain a certain pressure.

Let's say, at the root of the aorta. Independent of the load or the flow that it's being demanded of these different parallel branches.

We will switch between these two views throughout the course, or we will talk about cardiac output a little bit more right now.

We'll also talk about arterial blood pressure. Right.

But when we talk about, for example, the control mechanisms that allow us to maintain blood pressure homeostasis.

We'll talk primarily about maintaining blood pressure near the level of the heart or near the base of the skull.

The two important organs, as Doctor Stokes pointed out, to maintain perfusion to the heart.

You want to maintain perfusion to the brain. You can be in kidney failure.

Your liver can be shot right, but you're still trying to hold on to the perfusion, to the brain itself and to the heart itself.

So we will we will switch between these two views.

And sometimes it might not be easy to do that, but we will try to.

Ease you into it? Yes. Let me be more precise.

So blood pressure fluctuates as I'm walking around over here.

My blood pressure goes up and down, right? But if we say of a time average, if I'm all of you were probably lying down earlier in the day, right?

And then you got up. Some of you or all of us have at some point or another experience, like a little bit dizziness if you get up too, too quickly.

Then we hold on to something for a little bit and we're back, right?

So in that moment, blood pressure has gone through a significant swing, probably about 30 or 40mm of mercury.

And we'll show you some of those data when we talk about the, um, the, uh, control mechanisms.

There are constant fluctuations going on. We have a systolic diastolic, right.

We have longer term variations. We have perturbations to the cardiovascular system that make our blood pressure fluctuate all over the place.

But if we look at the time, averaged. Of blood pressure.

There is actually a value more or less at the body for some reason likes to maintain something in or around 90 100mm, a marker of material pressure.

Right? That's what I'm talking about. Uh, we'll get to that.

Yeah, we'll get to that. All right. The point that I want to make here with this slide is these little crosses over here.

Are the loci locations, if you will, of resistance modulation.

If the heart. Can provide the vascular system in with constant pressure over here.

Then each individual vascular territory over here has the luxury of modulating its own blood supply without stealing blood flow from someone else.

Right. If the heart only gives out five liters and you're starting to exercise over here and your vasodilator over here,

and the path of least resistance now is massively through here, right?

You're stealing flow from everywhere else in the body.

So, as I said, one view that we will adopt throughout the class is that of constant blood pressure or blood pressure homeostasis.

The other view is that of perfusion, which is the heart providing enough blood flow to the organs.

For oxygen delivery. And for uptake of CO2 and metabolic waste products.

First thing that we'll talk about is cardiac output.

So perfusion. This is a somewhat dated slide.

However still true. Over 100 years old.

Some of this data and what I'm what we're showing you over here is on the x axis is some measure of workload.

Jump on the treadmill and you start running. Right on the x axis you have cardiac output or cardiac index that I've already introduced.

Or oxygen consumption over here. Now, what you see here is a very linear relationship.

Between. Your work. Oxygen consumption and cardiac output.

They mirror each other. The more you exercise, the higher your cardiac output and the higher your oxygen consumption.

Essentially parallel. Meaning that within the limits of what you can do.

The demand of your of your body of increased metabolic rate is actually met by an increase in cardiac output.

We said that our baseline cardiac output over here is around five liters per minute.

This is more like the seven liters per minute that was mentioned earlier, right?

But look at the dynamic range. Some of you might be athletes.

Right. So performance athletes, you can go up to 25 30l per minute cardiac output.

Think of that dynamic range. Think of that when you actually measure the.

Flow out of your bathtub. Okay.

Now, you can also increase your oxygen consumption by increasing the oxygen extraction.

Right. So her go round. Normally each hemoglobin molecule gives up on average one oxygen.

Right. If you have 100% oxygenation on the arterial side,

we usually measure something on the order of 75% when it comes as mixed venous blood back into the right ventricle.

Right now, if you really need to need more oxygen, you can also extract more oxygen.

But to first order, the cardiovascular system increases oxygen delivery by increasing cardiac output.

Okay, I find this impressive, but I leave it up to you to see whether this is the same.

Now we do one more, uh, conversation here on the board, and now I can erase what we had earlier or what you learned earlier.

And this will be an exceedingly important concept.

You will see it over and over and over again in this class, and I can promise you that there will be.

At least I know that there's already one problem like this on your homework assignment,

and there will be at least one of those problems on your midterm exam.

Okay, so it's up to you whether you want to pay attention or not.

Here's what are we going to do it? We want to determine steady state cardiac output.

And what we're doing is we're dividing the cardiovascular system into two blocks here in the upper block over here, it's the heart.

Plus lungs or pulmonary system. And in the bottom part.

Is the peripheral circulation is. That's what I call it.

I just called it body. So let me put this up over here.

So you can see it. Okay.

Actually, I'm not that tall. What we will do is we will do a conservation of mass approach.

And the the mass that we want to conserve is oxygen.

And what we need to know over here is how much oxygen.

The body is taking up from the surrounding, right.

How much oxygen is coming here on the venous side, and how much oxygen is leaving per unit time over here into the arterial system?

So. I'll define a few variables.

The Vo two dot. Is oxygen.

Uptake. And this is in milliliters of O2 per minute.

Then we have the delivery of oxygen.

Here is Q. Times.

See? We.

Or two, and the extraction of oxygen or the release of oxygen.

Here is two. So Q is our cardiac output.

And that is in milliliters per minute. I'll bring this board up in just a second.

CVO2 is mixed.

Venus. Know. Oxygen.

Content. And that is in milliliters.

Of all. And milliliters of O2.

Per. Milliliters. Of blood.

And the same is true for the subscript a over here.

Sorry. I want it to be fast, but this here is.

See, a or two is the arterial.

Oxygen. Content.

In the same units. So let me bring this up and let me tell you what it is.

Blood returns to the heart. At a particular flow rate.

We are assuming steady state. Nothing is changing. Right.

So blood is returning from the heart and it carries a certain amount of oxygen.

That oxygen content is what we call kV or two.

A little over bar means mixed venous. It's just. Oxygen content from the upper part of the body in the lower part of the body is usually not the same.

Once they mix in the right ventricle, that's it. Okay, you get an average.

CO2 is the arterial oxygen content is what is carried away on the arterial side.

Right. So what we're doing over here is we're essentially saying this in engineering terms is a control volume.

What is coming in. Has to come out. No sources or sinks of oxygen here.

Right what is coming in per unit time. Is what we're taking up from the outside.

Plus what's returned to this control volume from the venous side.

In steady state that has to balance. What the arterial side.

It's taking away. Then you.

All in here. In response.

The minor. Modification. Right.

So that control volume. No sources, no sinks.

Conservation of mass. How many oxygen molecules are going in has to be equal to the oxygen molecules going out per unit time.

Right now with that. We can set up a mass balance.

And we can see what is coming in is v dot or two. Plus q cardiac output times kV or two has to be equal.

What comes out and this is q times. CAA oh two.

Does it make sense? Goes in, has to come out. We all came in over here.

This morning. At some point, we all have to go out again, right?

There are no sources of things. People are dying in here. We don't. Giving birth, right?

Number of people is conserved. At least it doesn't look like it.

Nobody of us seems in acute distress. This is his baseline state.

I mean. We leave it at that.

Okay. So what we can say now is what we're really interested in is, is Q over here?

Right. So what we can say Q over here is our cardiac output is V dot or two, which is now.

So. CV.

Uh. A minus CD, right? Oh two -302 is the correct?

All right. Thanks. So that's the fifth equation.

And what we pretty much did is we all that we did is we apply conservation of mass.

Now you can use CO2. You can use O2. You can use temperature as an indicator.

Right. So you have to measure, you know, temperature. There's various methods of thermal dilution which essentially operate the same.

This is one of the simplest, uh um um applications.

And what we're saying is if you can measure the oxygen uptake,

if you can measure the arterial oxygen content and the mixed venous oxygen content, we can determine the cardiac output in steady state.

Now. We drew the control volume over around the heart and the lungs together.

You can also use a different control volume. You just can say what goes into the lungs has to convert what comes out of the lungs.

Right. It's very convenient to do that because the VO2 still goes into the lungs.

Right. So here we are really looking at what's coming out of the heart lung pumping unit, meaning that whole unit together.

Right. That's what we call cardiac output. If you draw that control box around just the pulmonary circulation in the lungs.

Then you're determining pulmonary blood blood flow.

And that might be different from cardiac output depending on certain pathologies.

All right. So let's take a break here. We'll come back in ten minutes.

Yes. I think the the bagels and everything should be outside. Uh.

Oops. No problem. Thank you.

Sure. It's in the. It's in the notes. Yeah, but you know your handwriting.

I don't know. You're the first person to tell me that. Yeah.

Let's get. Let's continue. Let's get settled. So I believe the fetal circulation is described in your book.

Um, I will take a look. Um, there were a few questions about about the fetal circulation.

Be happy to to go over this again. Um, if it's not clear after the after you you had a chance to read one thing that I pointed out.

Um. Here was.

Um. Ductus arteriosus. Right. Connection between the aorta and the pulmonary artery.

Uh, right to left. Shunt of blood from the right.

Bypassing the lungs. Right. We don't have all of us.

Likely don't have the ductus arteriosus anymore.

But what we do have in what is indicated over here is the ligament.

Some arterial, some. Right. So once that vascular smooth muscle under high oxygen tension.

Now baby breathing 21% oxygen. Right.

That smooth muscle constricts and completely obliterates.

The, um, closes off the ductus. And eventually it degenerates into the connective tissue ligament.

Right. So you still see in these drawings the ligament artery.

Awesome. It's what's left over of the ductus arteriosus.

All right. Okay. So coming back to what I've done over here.

Is a summary. We have a control volume.

And our control volume is only around the hearts and the lungs.

It was a question. Very, very perceptive question is okay if there's no things or sources, where is the oxygen utilized?

Right. The oxygen is utilized in the body. Right.

The body is not our control volume. Control volume is only around the heart and the lungs.

And what we are assuming here implicitly by applying conservation of mass around this dashed line over here,

is that there's negligible, negligible oxygen uptake over here.

Right. Not oxygen uptake here, but oxygen utilization, etc.

Right. So it's only around the heart and the lungs over here.

That what comes in? Cardiac output times mixed venous oxygen content.

Plus with auto tool we were taking out from the environment.

Has to be balanced in steady state. Not transient, right in steady state.

What is coming out. Okay. And then we have our formula over here which is V .02.

Divided by the difference between the oxygen content on the arterial side, minus the oxygen content on the x venous side.

Now. We know, or you probably know already that there is a maximum oxygen carrying capacity of the blood, right?

If all of your hemoglobin molecules are occupied with oxygen.

You have 100% oxygen. Measured by whatever.

You know Paul. So this is my graph right now. You can push a little bit more into the soluble soluble phase, right?

If you crank up the oxygen tension that you breathe in.

But that's usually very negligible compared to all of the oxygen carrying capacity of all your hemoglobin molecules.

So you could write this in another form. You could write this as maximum oxygen carrying capacity times arterial oxygen.

You know, percent of arterial oxygen saturation minus mixed venous oxygen saturation.

And we'll have a couple of problems that I think we'll get to at the end where we can apply this.

Okay, now that's what I meant by cardiac output or perfusion.

Perfusion is the delivery of oxygen to the end organ. And so that's what the heart gives out is volumetric flow rate.

So. Let's talk about the cardiac cycle.

Here is a diagram that might need a little bit of getting used to, because we are encoding both temporal information.

And spatial information. Let us start at the level of the left ventricle.

Here the left ventricle is aptly represented as a piston.

Right. It's a pump. All it does. It fills, it empties.

Fills. It empties. It's like a piston pushing in. Right?

Stuff is coming out. You retract your filling. Right now, the pressure that the left ventricle generates is 120.

But as we said earlier, not over 80, but over something close to, let's say 5 or 8mm.

That's why we usually talk about the peak systolic pressure.

Maximum pressure over here. Right. And the end diastolic pressure.

Or the pressure at the end of film. There's a valve between the left ventricle and the aortic root or the aortic system.

That's called the mitral valve. Right. And you're pushing over a very short period of time.

It's at about one third of the cardiac cycle length is the ejection.

You're pushing that 70ml into the aorta. Or the arterial system.

Now the large vessels. Large systemic aorta.

Large arteries. They're very elastic, as we'll see in the next lecture.

Right. What you're doing is you're actually converting kinetic energy that follows injection into the arterial tree into stretch.

What you're doing is you're stretching the wall. You're increasing the wall tension.

You're converting kinetic energy of bolus injection into potential energy.

So doing systole ejection into the arterial tree during ventricular diastole when this valve is closed.

Passive recoil of those stretched arteries so that blood flow can now flow

from the arterial system through the micro circulation into the venous system.

And that's what happens. Doing your cardiac cycle on the arterial side.

Peak systolic pressure 120. And you have run off into the periphery.

You have that sort of passive recoil, right?

Pressure is decreased and decreased because you are losing blood into the periphery through the micro circulation venous system.

Right. And then, you know, by the time you hit somewhere around 80 or so.

The next pulse comes along. Next. Right.

Okay. So this is also called the Wind Castle models because it's the old movies that you might have seen.

German sort of Wind Castle air chamber. Right. So in the old movies, when the fire brigade comes, they do this, right?

They have like this thing that they that they're pushing up and down and up and down.

What they're doing is a pressurizing a chamber. Right?

They're pumping things in in an intermittent manner,

but they're pressurizing a chamber so that what comes out of the nozzle is actually a continuous stream.

That's exactly the same mechanism. You have intermittent flow in, right?

You have continuous flow coming out because you're pressurizing a chamber. Now.

As you go into the periphery to the smaller and smaller and smaller vessels, you have what are known.

This is pre capillary pre capillary resistance vessels.

As blood is traversing these vessels, the mean pressure is dropping because there's dissipation, there's friction.

Positivity is also reduced, meaning that the compliance lessons.

We'll talk about this. Is reduced as you go towards smaller and smaller and smaller vessels, right?

Until you have essentially no pulse tactility left at the level of the capillaries.

And your. Hydrostatic pressure might have dropped to something around 2020 two millimeters of mercury.

No positivity. Steady flow.

Why do we want to bring the pressure from something 120 down to something like that's like 20 to something that's quite low?

Going to exchange across the vessels in the tissue. So what? What do you want to exchange?

Oxygen. Now you could exchange oxygen. What's the mechanism of oxygen exchange?

So homegrown is is red blood cells, hemoglobin.

That's the carrying mechanism. But what is the exchange method of physical exchange mechanism.

Diffusion right now, you could actually diffuse at a high hydrostatic pressure, right?

But that would mean that you have to have a strong wall. A strong word means you have to have a lot of.

Muscle smooth muscle cell, which would be sick. We want to reduce the diffusion barrier.

That means you have essentially one layer of undecillion cells, as we will see,

in order to maintain that, have very, you know, fast diffusion crosses the vascular wall.

You have to have a low pressure because a single layer of endothelial cells cannot withstand much pressure, right.

Okay. So then we have venous.

Uh, vessels very thin walled. And by the time you reach the right atrium.

Precious. Essentially zero. Hydrostatic mean right atrial pressure with reference to atmosphere essentially zero.

Also always well used as a reference pressure in the cardiovascular system.

This is mean right atrial pressure with reference to atmosphere essentially zero into the left ventricle or the right ventricle.

You have again the pump right. This peak systolic pressure around 2220 four millimeters of mercury and diastolic pressure around five.

Few millimeters of mercury. Right. Then you have the pulmonary arteries.

You have the micro circulation. You come back to the left atrium.

Okay. So where you are in the cardiovascular system.

Um, determines well on where you are.

Determines where you might make a measurement.

Um, the measurement that you're making depends on the location where you're actually doing the measurement.

Right. And that's also true. And I don't know whether that's the next slide that comes later, uh, of the arterial pulse.

So the arterial pulse that we only have shown here very in a very lumped manner in these, uh, Winchester vessels, um, is also very different,

whether you measure at the root of the aorta, as we see, or you measuring, for example,

in the radial artery or the femoral artery or somewhere else in the periphery.

They're mechanisms. Yeah. Correct.

So micro. Structurally they differ slightly. Right. So the resistance vessels still have, uh, you know, still have some smooth muscle that is, um.

Uh, well, both of these actually have smooth, smooth muscle.

And sort of the differentiation may be a little bit artificial.

However, what you see over here, if we are saying that we have about five liters or so of blood,

another one of those numbers that might be good to remember is the vast amount of blood is stored in the systemic venous capacitance.

So that's what's meant by this capacitance versus what we. The next lecture will be all about the peripheral circulation.

So we'll dive a lot deeper into that. Right. There's there is a small resistance associated with with the venous system,

but that's very, very small compared to the resistances that we see over here.

Okay. All right, so two circuits in series, right?

Pulse utility. Generated by the by the left ventricle and the right ventricle.

Right. But it depends very strongly where you are what you would actually measure.

If we zoom in on the less idealized but still idealized, um,

events of the cardiac cycle of a single cardiac cycle as viewed from the left ventricle can do exactly the same thing on the right ventricle.

But we have certain mechanical events. That we shall commit to memory.

Okay. What we're showing over here is the root aortic pressure in the dashed line.

The the dashed line up here. The solid line is our left ventricular pressure.

And the dashed line below. Over here is the left atrial pressure.

We have four phases to the cycle. There is the filling phase where the mitral valve is open.

But the aortic valve is closed. Coming back to something we said earlier.

Now there's a direct communication of the left atrium to the left ventricle flows from the left atrium to the left ventricle.

Equivalent right to the right ventricle on the right ventricular side at some point.

The myocardial cells do what they do. They had some action potential came by.

You know, they do the acting myosin thing that we're going to talk about. Right.

And attention is being generated.

At that level, when the pressure difference is such that an active tension is being generated, the mitral valve closes.

Right. When the mitral valve closes, the ventricle continues to constrict or contract.

A pressure is being generated. And we are going through a phase where the mitral valve is closed.

But the aortic valve is not yet open. And this to some confusingly called ice volume contraction.

I also make simply meaning here that there's no inflow and there's no outflow.

The hardest contracting actin myosin filaments across cycling.

Right. Tension is being generated, but there's no inflow. No outflow volume is constant.

Until the pressure inside of the ventricle exceeds the pressure at the root of the aorta,

aortic valve snaps open and you're going through what is called the ejection phase.

Now you have that piston moving forward essentially, right? So you have a flow that's coming from the left ventricle into the root of the aorta.

Jackson. Now what you see over here.

Going back briefly to the filling face at the dust line over here is slightly higher.

Then the solid line over here,

meaning that the pressure gradient atrial pressure slightly higher than the ventricular pressure favoring flow into the ventricle.

Right. And there's this little hump over here where the atria are contracting.

Now when the aortic valve is open. The ventricular pressure is slightly higher.

Then the root of the aortic pressure. Pressure difference. Very low.

Once the valves are open, they are open like this.

And you have very low resistance between the left ventricular outflow tract and the root of the aorta.

As a matter of fact, there has been a lot of work in the 60s and 70s about impedance matching.

That evolution is such that you don't want to lose a lot of energy at that level, right.

So. One two millimeters of mercury difference can lead to the significant flow of that 70ml over 300 milliseconds.

Right now at some point the ventricle the the the um, uh, the ventricular myocytes stop to recruit additional actin myosin molecules.

Right. And there's a crossover point. Where the aortic pressure.

Is slightly higher than the ventricular pressure, but you still have forward momentum,

meaning it's not at that point when that crossover happens that the valve closes, right?

It's essentially like, you know, you push a car, right?

You push a car, you get it moving. The force and the movement are going in the same direction.

Right now you want to stop the car. Now you hold back, but the car has momentum, right?

So even though you're having a force that's going the opposite direction, the movement is still going in that direction.

That's exactly what's happening over here, right? Momentum is still.

Coming out of it. The momentum is still driving flow out of the out of the ventricle.

Right. But the ventricle is starting to relax. All right.

So the pressure drops below here. The aortic valve closes once reflux occurs.

Right. There's a brief tip of reflux. Valve closes.

Mechanical isolation of the ventricle. From the electric.

Right at this point. Autograph closes. Wrap it.

Fall in blood pressure because the ventricle myocardium relaxes. Until the mitral valve opens again, filling happens again.

Then there's again a period where the aortic valve is closed and the mitral valve is closed.

And we call this ice ohmic relaxation. So that fourth cycles of the cardiac.

Cycle are filling. I make contraction injection and I make relaxation,

and then filling again the perfectly well defined through the combination of which valve is open and which one is closed.

What is that combination? If we look exactly at the same thing in two lectures from now in terms of the pressure volume loop,

not as a pressure versus time, but the pressure volume loop of the ventricle.

And you will see that there's nice corners where these kinds of transitions happen.

Okay. All right. Look, looking at this from the point of view of the, um, of the.

Atrium. Once the mitral valve closes, right.

There might be a sharp wave that you see over here. That has to do with the fact that the aortic valve opens.

Right. And then. The pressure rises because there's flow still coming into the atrium from the periphery, right?

The atrioventricular valve is closed, but you still get flow from the pulmonary circulation, right?

So atrial pressure rises slowly, slowly, slowly until the mitral valve opens again and you're dumping everything into the left ventricle.

There was a question here. This is work for.

The. So it's exactly the same.

Right. It's just what determines the opening. And the closing of the valves is the right atrial and right ventricular pressure.

In the right ventricular pressure in the pulmonary artery pressure. But it's essentially the same, just scaled down.

Okay, but there's no interaction in the sense that that, you know.

That the right side of the heart is dependent on what the left side of the heart is doing.

So. Not very different.

There are certain maneuvers where you can actually make it sort of a little early or a little later.

Right. But in general, it's mostly determined by the functioning of the electrical system and the efficiency with

which the electrical impulses can be distributed essentially simultaneously on the right side,

on the left. I know this. We have bundle branches, these kinds of things. That can be some asynchrony.

Right. But Doctor Terrell will talk a lot about that. Other than the.

Other than here? Yeah. So here.

Yeah. Because at this point, what can happen is that you actually have a slide.

So sort of momentum is going forward.

Right. But the ventricle is starting to relax. Right. Once you actually have a slight degree of reflux right.

Once there's the momentum so you're decelerating the volume right.

The flow right. Once there's a slight degree of reflux there's shear stress on these leaflets.

And now you have a you have a tiny bit of reflux going this way that closes the valves.

Right. Yeah. Uh, we'll get to that in two lectures so that that will relate to, uh, to a calcium induced calcium release,

how calcium is handled by the sarcoplasmic reticulum and is being taken, uh, taken up again by the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

The circa receptors is something called phosphor lambent.

And we'll talk about all of that. Okay. Yeah.

It's essentially the same mechanisms here. It's an oxygen dependent mechanism.

Right. So that of the relaxation of the actin myosin filaments.

So we will actually think about this in terms of a time varying license.

Right. So that that that the cellular machinery, if you want to abstract it again, this is two lectures from now,

is that you can look at it as a time varying license that cycles between a high loss, a high capacitance status feelings, a low license right.

And a low capacitance state or high license is the ejection state.

And it's actually we will see that will actually go can go very far in terms of conceptually and even quantitatively

understanding the behavior of the individual ventricle by just saying it cycles through these sort of two,

two capacitive states. Yeah.

So so the atrial contraction happens only at the very end.

So think of. Think of the think of the ventricle in its ejection state as sort of a very stiff balloon.

Right. So made it very stiff. Right. And now a magic switch happens when you make it very floppy.

Right. If the volume didn't change, the pressure has to drop significantly.

Right. And when the pressure dropped significantly. That's what happens over here, right?

It drops below the pressure of the atria that has increased.

And at that point there's a passive opening of these leaflets of the of the valve that then allow the flow to occur from the atria to the ventricles.

Okay. All right. I do want to move on.

But you have a lot of questions about this. Yeah. There's a little bit of reflux, so there's no valves between the superior vena cava,

inferior vena cava and the right atrium, or between the left atrium and the pulmonary regulation.

There's a little bit of that, right. It does contract.

It does contract. But we can actually in the you know, how much of stroke volume of the of the ventricular filling is dependent on that atrial,

what is called atrial kick at the end so that you have that sort of final push.

1,015%. Right. So you can actually live without it. And people who have like persistent atrial fibrillation.

So when you don't have the. So regular contraction where you're just sitting there, fiber leading.

Right. They don't have that benefit. And so you losing.

15% off so far. All right, one final question.

Yes. Correct. Exactly right. Okay.

All right. Now play with it. Oh, this is a measurement here.

It's a high fidelity catheter. This one tell you that this is this is kind of sort of real, this crossover point.

Um, if you didn't believe me. But play with it, you can go, you know, to this website.

There's a whole bunch of other tutorials where you can actually click through,

and you can understand what the mechanical events are, uh, as a function of, you know, where you are in the cardiac cycle.

Now, what I haven't talked about in the previous slide is heart sounds.

And as I said at the beginning, um, this is something that we will assign to you throughout the first half of the class.

So that sort of all the murmurs and all these kinds of things, you just have to think through, read it, be done with it.

Right now, heart sounds. Many of you, I presume, at least on the MD side, probably have a stethoscope, probably have gotten one as a gift.

Maybe you don't and you get one eventually, right? So you can you can actually listen to these sounds, right.

That's right. Uh, one if you don't have one, one will be provided for you.

Right? Yeah. So when you do ICM right.

Once you do ICM, you'll get your, um, uh, stethoscope and, and first thing you'll do is you listen to yourself.

So what is heart sound, right.

It's an acoustic wave. Where does it come from?

But it comes from acceleration and deceleration of blood. Right.

They called S1, s2, S3, s4. The other ones and murmurs, as I said, that we're not going to talk about much,

but the the the important ones and the ones that I assigned as reading for you for today.

And maybe a follow on reading is as one is to S3 and as for now, important as one.

Coincides with the closing of the mitral valve and the opening of the aortic

valve more through the closing of the mitral valve if you close the valve right.

It's nothing smooth, a snapshot and you have vibration.

That vibration sets up a vibration in the fluid phase, and that sets up a vibration throughout the tissue that can actually pick up as a sound.

Right as two. Over here is the closing of the aortic valve over here.

And here is the opening of the, um, mitral valve.

But it's the closing of the aortic valve that.

Sets up that vibration that you can pick up,

and there are certain locations that you will learn when you do ICM certainly when you're on the wards where you actually listen for S1,

where are you listening for S2? Obviously you want to be over these different vowels now.

Is. As for that, you can sometimes hear. And that has to do with the contraction, the atrial kick,

where you have an additional contraction that can set up a pressure wave that can be, you know, reverberating and vibrating.

And there's also something known as a three. When the mitral valve opens, that there can be a sudden rush of blood into the left ventricle.

That can also set up a, um. A, uh, um, an acoustic wave.

Those are the main ones. The important ones. And. Do you know which part of the cardiac cycle they actually correspond to?

And what you know, what they actually indicate. Electrocardiogram we've talked about briefly in the last lecture.

We will have a lot more to say. So let me skip over that for the time being. So we talked about cardiac output.

We talked about the cardiac cycle. Now we're talking about the arterial pulse propagation of the arterial pressure right.

We said that heart left ventricle contracts.

It ejects this bolus into the arterial tree. It converts, you know, kinetic energy into that elastic energy.

So when you are very close, when you have a high fidelity catheter and you can advance it very close to the aortic root,

right, then you can measure something like this over here.

This, by the way, was done in the wombat and the, the, the um, the numbers over here is the amount of the distance in centimeters from the aortic.

So you advance it all the way in the left ventricle.

You just pull it, you know, past the aortic valve and then you know, how many centimeters do you actually withdraw it.

And you see this very big and sharp incision over here in caesura.

Right. That's known as a diachronic notch, meaning if you're very close to the aortic valve.

Right. That snap is what this measures. Right.

Because there's a little bit of fluid that is sloshing around.

And that's that very high frequency component over here.

Now as you and you see that this is sort of the waveform over here.

Now, as you withdraw that catheter further and further and further and further and further away,

right, you see that the morphology of that pulse changes quite a bit.

It gets smoothed out, but also the amplitude is actually rising.

That has to do with reflections. That has to do with the taper of the vessel and continuous reflections that are going back and forth.

The mean arterial pressure to be defined in a moment.

Stays more or less the same. All right. Systolic pressure is going up.

Diastolic pressure is going down a little bit by the mean pressure essentially staying the same.

The same in a human, we say when we're close to the aorta, this is our arterial pressure over here.

And this if you're looking at the radial pressure wave over here, this is what we would measure at the radial artery for example.

And this is under various exercising conditions,

you can actually see a dramatic increase in the peripheral pulse and also in the arterial pulse depending on when the reflected

wave timing of the reflected wave and the superposition of that reflected wave vis-a-vis the phase of the primary wave.

So what you see, for example, over here, right, is you see at the aorta, you see an initial wave over here that's very much similar to this over here.

But then you see that additional hump on top of it. That's the reflected wave coming back already.

Okay, so the pulse morphology changes significantly of where you are in the, uh, in the arterial tree.

How do we measure blood pressure? The same way as we did probably about 120 years ago.

Right. You blow up a cuff.

And of course, skilled physicians like Doctor Stoltz does not believe any machine.

Right. He has his stethoscope. And what he does is he blows up this curve to supra systolic levels.

Old school. If there's one thing you have to know about doctor stools is that he's old school.

That's actually his middle name. So you blow this cuff up to supra systolic levels.

Right. Arteries are also collapsible.

So what you do is you collapse. Flow. You collapse these vessels.

No flow going through. Right. Then you put your stethoscope close to the point of collapse, right close to the cuff.

And you very slowly with this. Some valve over here.

Right. Let the air out of the cuff. Once.

The cuff pressure reaches the systolic blood pressure.

What you will see. What you will hear is the so-called cough cough sounds.

Meaning that at the peak of systole, the inside pressure is slightly higher than the cuff pressure.

And you have this. You have a little bit of volume injection into it, because just at the peak of systole, you have enough pressure.

The heart generates enough pressure to actually open up the vessel for a little bit of blood to go through.

The moment that it goes through, there's a resistive drop and it collapses again.

Right. So you determine the systolic blood pressure by the first.

Time that you can hear that sound. Right now, as you continuously release the pressure, that sound gets larger and larger,

because the part of the cardiac cycle that is now above the external pressure becomes longer and longer, right?

Until you're actually dropping below.

The diastolic pressure. And now the vessel is completely open.

So at that point, that squish sounds should completely disappear.

So you listen to the first appearance of it, which is a systolic pressure and the disappearance of it,

which when you read that gauge here at that point is the diastolic pressure.

Okay. Now, not everybody is old school like Doctor Stoltz.

Um. If you go to MIT medical or any probably, um.

Uh, clinic or doctor's office, um, someone probably wheels in a device,

puts the cuff on and does that automatically, um, with a, uh, uh, with the cuff that has some smarts on it.

Right. And so it does exactly the same thing.

There are some heuristics of trying to figure out where is the systolic pressure below the first appearance,

where would be the diastolic pressure and where is the mean pressure over here.

So most people, even my PCP at at MIT medical doesn't do this with the with with the stethoscope anymore.

There's variations here. So sometimes, you know, you'll have a doctor who says, look, I'd rather do it the old way.

Does this, I believe it.

Now, if you're in an ICU like Doctor Stoltz when he is attending in the ICU at MGB or MG, I don't know what you want to call it these days.

That's what I'm. Man's greatest hospital. Um, you actually want to have continuous blood pressure measurement, right?

Because a patient might be critically ill that you want to have that measurement all the time, not just intermittently.

That means you can relate. Usually the femoral, the radial artery.

Right. You have a continuous fluid column now in, uh, in contact with the, uh, with the blood.

There's a pressure transducer over here that then measures the pressure differential across that transducer with respect to the atmosphere.

You can flush this catheter so that it stays nice and patient and doesn't get clogged.

There's a lot of work to trying to figure out how to do continuous blood pressure monitoring or to do this metric measurements,

um, more accurately and, and, and less invasively for the continuous one.

Um, but to this day, we're still relying essentially, uh, for blood pressure measurement on the same,

uh, kind of, um, technology that was developed 120 years ago.

And all of you who have, like, Google watches, these kinds of smartwatches,

all of these companies are trying to figure that out, and nobody has it yet.

So there's a lot of R&D dollars that have been put behind this. Okay.

All right. So we have, I think only one more blackboard discussion over here.

And that has to do with the definition of material pressure perfusion pressure and vascular resistance.

So we're only focusing here on the arterial blood pressure waveform.

Doctor Stokes on Tuesday said that when we think about the ventricular pressures, we really that mean pressure is not really meaningful, right.

But swinging from like five millimeters of mercury to 120mm of mercury is really what the systolic pressure is.

What's the peak pressure and what's the lowest pressure. What's the diastolic pressure.

But when we're talking about the arterial pressure and sometimes on the venous side as well,

it is meaningful to uh, talk about the mean pressure perfusion, pressure transmittal pressure.

So let's define a few terms. But it might go here.

So. Let's say we have a vascular segment that looks like this, right?

We can define. An upstream pressure.

And a downstream pressure. An inside pressure and an outside pressure.

Right. And when we talk about the perfusion. In the perfusion pressure.

We are interested of what is driving blood through that vessel. Right.

What is driving flow? In this direction.

And that is given by the upstream pressure in most.

Um vascular birds by minus the downstream pressure.

Like a pipe, right? Pressure difference.

So if you upstream.

PD. It's downstream. Now there's also another pressure difference.

So she called the trans more pressure.

Now, for those of you who were in respiratory physiology earlier today, that's exactly what we had over there, right?

What keeps the lung open? It's inside pressure. Minus outside pressure.

As the name suggests, trans mural. If you can read my handwriting.

So trans mural pressure, the pressure across the wall.

And that is the inside pressure minus the outside pressure.

So here P is inside.

And Poe is outside. And I bring this up.

Make sure that you don't confuse the two. Perfusion upstream minus downstream.

Trans mural inside. Minus outside. Think of a balloon.

If you blow up the balloon. Right. The upstream pressure is my buccal pressure that I generate.

You know, with my mouth. Right. The downstream pressure is the pressure in the balloon.

That's what's driving the flow into the balloon, right? What is expanding the balloon?

It's the inside pressure minus the outside pressure. That's the trends.

Neural pressure, the pressure across the wall. Perfusion is what's going through.

Right. You upstream PD downstream P inside P0 outside.

So trans mural pressure is the pressure across the wall. The trans more pressure is the pressure.

Uh sorry trans woman pressure. The pressure across the wall.

The, um perfusion pressure is the pressure that, uh, drives flow through the system.

Okay. So as we as we saw in these, in these, um, tracings and diagrammatic representations.

Coming back to the arterial pressure pulse. It might look something like this.

Right. So this is our pressure pulse. The heart ejects.

Pressure goes up in the aorta. The heart relaxes.

The valve closes. The pressure goes down. Right. We call this the systolic pressure.

And we call this. The diastolic pressure.

How would you define mean pressure? Call this capital T, let's call this zero.

So the cycle length is T. How would you define the mean pressure of that wave form.

Yeah. Say a little bit more loudly.

The area under the curve and. So mean arterial pressure map.

So this here is a waveform. Let's call this p of T right.

Mean arterial pressure map. Also the mean over time.

It's the area under the curve of P of T.

Prime duty Prime. That's the area under the curve, right?

And you normalize by the cycle length. Right? That's the ministerial pressure.

So very few of you will come to the bedside and do that integral in your head.

Right now. Of course, the monitors, you know that in an ICU, you know, when you have one of those, um.

Uh, in when you have one of these, uh, these indwelling catheters, does it automatically.

So you probably you usually then see something that looks like, um.

120 over 80. And sometimes it's represented like this means systolic is 120.

Diastolic 80. Mean of 90. Now, what you can do is you can approximate.

And one way to approximate this is to say, well, you know.

We're all simple people here, right? I can only speak for myself, I guess.

And you can say, well, we could actually see that this is sort of triangular. And you could say, well, what is this?

We have a hide over here. And that height is is also a name.

That name is called the pulse pressure.

And this is the systolic pressure minus the diastolic pressure.

Is that pulse amplitude right. It's called the pulse pressure. Now, if you do this and you do a triangular, you know what?

What's the area of a triangle? Yeah.

So you can actually compute that you add whatever is on top of the bottom here.

Right. Turns out that. You actually spend a little bit more time in diastole?

Then what a triangular representation might suggest. So there is a very neat formula that we use all the time that says.

That the mean arterial pressure is approximately equal to.

Map is approximately equal to the diastolic pressure plus one third of the systolic minus the diastolic pressure,

or one third p diastolic plus one third of pints pressure.

So if you were to do a triangular representation, as we did over here, it would be one and a half.

Right, but you spend a little bit more time in diastole than you than that suggests.

So this is an approximation that we will use all the time.

If you have systolic pressure, if you have diastolic pressure, this gives you a approximation of the um, of the pulse pressure.

Now with that, what we can also get is an estimate of vascular resistance.

So if we have the mean arterial pressure.

We're usually not interested in the instantaneous flows, you know, and often not in the instantaneous pressure or some instantaneous resistance.

What we're interested in is what is, on average, the flow, what's on average the pressure.

So the resistance, let's say through the peripheral circulation, through the body, through the systemic circulation.

What's the upstream pressure. Arterial pressure.

In this case, mean arterial pressure if we're interested in average quantities.

What's the downstream pressure? We could say it's right atrial pressure or it's central venous pressure.

It's something that's very close to the right heart right.

So total peripheral total peripheral resistance or systemic vascular resistance also known as

are over here is mean arterial pressure minus let's call it mean or central venous pressure.

Something very close to the heart divided by your cardiac output.

Likewise if you're interested in pulmonary vascular resistance.

This is mean pulmonary artery pressure minus.

Mean. Let's say mean left atrial pressure.

Also divided by cardiac output.

Does that make sense? When we're interested in the resistances.

Right. Let's take the mean upstream pressure.

The mean downstream pressure. Over the mean flow that's going through that system.

Ignoring capacitive effects. Ignoring inductive effects.

Making the simplest approximation that we possibly can. Questions.

Sorry, sorry. CVP is central.

Venous pressure. So for example, some something very close to the right heart.

So it could be like inferior vena cava. Superior vena cava.

What was the other thing that you asked. Mean pulmonary artery pressure.

Mean left atrial pressure. Total peripheral resistance, also known as systemic vascular resistance.

And pulmonary vascular resistance. Yeah. Absolutely.

So oftentimes, but not always. We saw that the left mean left atrial pressure.

Once we get to the right side of the heart very close to zero. So oftentimes thank you.

This. Is oftentimes just approximated as map overkill, but not always.

In a normal state, you can think of states where you have massively elevated right atrial pressures.

Heart failure, right? Okay, so should I write this out?

Okay, I'll write it out.

I'll put it on canvas, because otherwise I'll be standing here for the next five minutes writing out the terminology, and my right arm is falling off.

Right, but I'll put that on canvas. I'll define all of these.

But the key point of emphasis here is mean upstream pressure minus mean downstream pressure.

If you look at the systemic circulation, what's coming out of the right heart, it's coming out of the left heart is a mean arterial pressure.

What's and what's going back into the right heart is the central venous pressure.

Right atrial pressure something very close to the right atrium divided by cardiac output.

All right. If you're interested in what's going through the lungs, what's the upstream pressure.

Is the pulmonary artery pressure. That's what's feeding the lungs mean pulmonary arterial pressure.

Is this one mean left atrial pressure. Is this one. It's a downstream pressure over cardiac output.

Okay. Now. Let's.

Um. Yes.

Uh, I could have not planted that question any better. I was just wondering whether I should cover it or not.

Thank you very much. Okay. So the units, the units, the units.

Ministerial pressure. 120 over 80 is our ministerial pressure.

It's our is our blood pressure. So PD 8120 -8041 through to 40 plus 80 for approximately 90 to 100mm of mercury.

Right. So this numerator here. Millimeters of mercury.

Right now you can express. Resistance in a flow in liters per minute.

Four liters per second. Milliliters per minute or milliliters per second.

Right. So the units for resistance.

The one that I like best. It's called the Peripheral.

Resistance. Unit.

Also known as Prue. Why is that funny?

And peripheral resistance units. I'm not getting something over here, it seems.

It's millimeters of mercury. Per milliliter.

Time. Second. The reason why I like this.

If you plug in the numbers, you have about 100 over here.

Right. You have about five liters over here, but then you divide.

It's not five liters per minute, it's five liters per 60s.

So you dividing by about. 600.

Uh. So you're dividing the 5000 by six and pi by about 100, right?

For the peripheral resistance, this comes about at around one.

And that's why I like it. Something that's one. Right.

Total peripheral resistance and peripheral resistance units one.

Can't get better than that now. There is a unit called the wood unit.

If you actually express this in. So this is now the wudu unit.

It's in millimeters of mercury. Times.

Minutes. Go. Time. Sorry. Time. Seconds divided by leaders.

So it's just a factor of a thousand different. Right.

So one peripheral resistant unit is 1000 watt units.

Where it gets really screwy. Right is in some of the older literature, even some of the cardiology textbooks.

You see that what we call one peripheral resistance unit.

Is equal to 1330.

Dines. Times.

Seconds. Over a centimeter to the fifth.

Do not use that unit. Now, Doctor Stoltz is old school.

I leave it at that. If you really want to mess with your attending.

Or your preceptor, right?

One peripheral resistance unit. It's 133 Mega Pascals.

Second. Parameter cubed.

If you ever see Doctor Stultz on the cardiology service at MD, do me a favor.

Remember that unit. And take a look at his face when you report the peripheral resistance to him.

It's Mega Pascal seconds per meter cubed. The purple basket.

Or. That's why I was hesitating for a moment while I was standing over there, and until I was asked about the units.

Now you have them, right? So, um, I'm partial to these.

Right? So whatever you want over here. No. To these. At least in my books.

Okay, so we've covered this, right.

So technically it's the integral over here. But we approximated it as diastolic pressure plus one third of the pulse pressure.

We also. Haven't talked about anything on the right side of the heart.

So this all of this was made it clear, hopefully, that we're talking about the arterial side.

We're talking about the systemic arterial side. But we can do the same thing on the pulmonary arterial side.

When we compute the mean pulmonary artery pressure.

It's also a waveform now. I brought some things to show and tell over here, and I don't know whether we have enough time to show this around,

but doctor still showed you at least tracings of what it's called the swan Gans.

Gans catheter or the pulmonary artery catheter. So if it still works like this morning, you have a catheter that you can actually put in.

Right. From the Venus side. So, you know, superior vena cava.

Right. And then what you can do is you can push this gently.

And what you will see that eventually that this pops open. You see that little balloon here?

I'll pass it around to be very gentle because they pop fairly easily.

So why do you have that balloon? For two reasons, right?

First thing he confesses around is you can actually float the catheter this way because when you insert it through the through the jugular vein,

right into this superior going to cava, you inflate this, you're going with the flow.

It provides you with buoyancy, takes you naturally to the right direction.

Right.

What you can see over here at the tip, there's an opening and you have a fluid column, which will then allow you to measure the right atrial pressure.

The right ventricular pressure. Right. And once you traverse a pulmonary valve you can see pulmonary artery pressure.

We also talked last time about threading it into one of the main branches of the pulmonary artery and then inflating the balloon.

Right. And when that happens and I cut this off over here, you are in the pulmonary artery.

You know that you're in the pulmonary artery because you're not going all the way down. Right.

You have like 20 some over 18 rather than 20, some over five.

Right. And then you don't want to blow this thing up in the main pulmonary artery.

Right. Because then there's no blood flow going through. You want to go into one of the side branches.

You inflate the balloon. You have what is called the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure as an approximation of the mean left atrial pressure.

Because you're blocking all flow and everything after a certain period of time that you're sensing is the downstream pressure.

Okay. That's that catheter that's going around. Now, the other catheters that I can pass around that you can put a lot of smarts on this.

Here is a more elaborate, uh, swan Ganz catheter.

You will see that there's some, uh, wires that are on here.

This is, for example, a thermistor that you can heat up, uh, fluid, and you can measure cardiac output with this as well.

I can pass this around.

And then Doctor Sills talked about the intra aortic balloon pump, which is this left ventricular assist device that goes into your.

Abdominal, ascending and descending aorta. And then it is gated to the cardiac cycle.

And it inflates just after the aortic valve closure to increase the pressure in the aorta so that you have increased runoff into the periphery.

Right. And then it deflates just before ejection happens,

so that the pressure in the order drops precipitously and the failing heart can pump against a lower.

What we would call afterload, right? It usually is not like this.

Right. But this has been passed around by generations of students.

So that's why this is happening. Now, some of you asked about the material that the pacing catheters are made of.

It's, um, it's, uh, elastomers.

That I use that I wrote it down somewhere over here. Polyurethane.

Polyurethane is most often used, but also silicone elastomers that are currently being used if you're really interested in that.

So pass these around. Now we're running up against time, but I will leave you with these two.

You just started as a junior attending interventional cardiologist as Boston Children's Hospital.

These are your first two cases. Let me tell you what's being represented here and then we'll come back.

You can do this. And we come back to this. Right atrium.

Right ventricle. Left atrium, left ventricle. Oxygenation levels shown over here.

Right. We measure the oxygenation levels in these chambers also in these vessels.

You measure the mean em right atrial pressure.

Mean left atrial pressure. Systolic over diastolic.

Systolic over diastolic. Mean pulmonary capillary.

Much pressure. Right. Same on this side. Over here.

There's some questions over here. There are two cases.

We'll bring that back at the end, at the beginning of the next lecture.

We'll cover this. Take a crack at it. See whether you can compute these various things on the canvas.

What I want to end with.

As I said at the beginning is a discussion, a brief comment, not a discussion, but a brief comment of the homework assignment.

Homework assignment is on canvas. Handed it out today, due next week.

As I said, we don't hand this out just to keep you busy. We know that you're busy, right?

There's a few problems. As you will see the first problem.

Ask you very simple questions, but we think of simple questions.

Name the structure that connects the left atrium and the left ventricle. Oxygen uptake of a patient is 200ml, blah blah blah.

Fig principle. Which phase of the cardiac cycle lies between the first and the second heart sound.

What is the definition of the mean systemic pressure? We haven't covered that yet. We'll cover that on Tuesday.

Tuesday. Today's Thursday right? Yeah. Tuesday. These are the first question is usually things that we think it's like if you don't know these right.

Do the reading. Write. Review the notes. This is the kind of thing that over time, we expect you to know and we expect you to apply.

You saw simple things, right? But make sure that these things you know, you don't spend, you don't have to spend much time on that.

These are covered.

The next question is, the question that I've already talked to you about is your faucet would be your next best friend for the next week, right?

Measure the flow that's coming out of the faucets. Measure the flow and compare that to cardiac output.

Problem three is cardiac cycle.

As we said today, we make you go through drawing the cardiac cycle so that you can actually see when do the valves open.

When do the valves close. When was S1, s2.

Right. What are these four cycles isoflurane contraction ejection ice relaxation.

So we'll help you along. Right. And then do we have a fourth problem.

The fourth problem is very simple. It's exactly what we actually showed earlier today.

Will have some arrows to some structures to just help you review the material okay.

So it should be pretty straightforward of your questions. Rachel is here I'm here.

Doctor Stoltz is here. Come talk to us. With that. Let's see you on Tuesday.

