[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
All right. Good morning. All right.

Okay. It's getting better. Not good yet. Okay.

So welcome back. Uh, public service announcement.

MIT has so, you know, a lot of idiosyncrasies.

One of them is that, uh, on certain dates when there's a holiday on a Monday,

the following Tuesday would be a Monday schedule in order to make up for class time,

because classes are usually Monday, Wednesday or Tuesday Thursday.

So MIT will be on the Monday schedule next Tuesday.

We are in Hmm's class. We will be on a Tuesday schedule next Tuesday, but the Monday class will have this lecture hall because it's at MIT.

So we will meet on Tuesday at the usual time in room 470.

That's building for room 370.

Okay, so next Tuesday, I don't know whether you have, uh, respiratory for those of you who have the respiratory class here.

Right. If you might have it in here. Because usually MIT doesn't have a class at 8:00 in the morning.

Right. But cardiovascular would be at room 470.

We will not follow the MIT schedule. You don't. Tuesday.

Room for 370. Okay. Any questions about that?

Okay. All right. I left you with two problems last at the end of last lecture, and I.

Challenge two I asked you. I suggested it to you that you take a look at it.

So. What do you think is going on with this patient?

Let me orient you. Right atrium.

Right ventricle. Left atrium. Left ventricle. Right.

What is measured over here is your oxygen saturation.

So your interventional cardiologist, you can put catheters anywhere in the cardiovascular system.

That's your job right. And measure things so you can measure the oxygen saturation of the blood in these various structures chambers vessels.

You can also measure the pressures. And you've measured the oxygen consumption.

So the O2 dot that we had in our equation.

Right. And you also measured the oxygen carrying maximum oxygen carrying capacity.

You're at Boston Children's Hospital. So your patients are likely pediatric.

Anything strikes me as abnormal. Just looking at the numbers.

So we said last time on each go around. Each hemoglobin molecule gives up about one oxygen.

So if it's fully oxygenated when it comes into the aorta on room air.

But something around 100%, 98% close enough, right?

We're going through the rest of the body. We're coming back through the inferior superior vena cava, coronary sinus to the right atrium.

Right. Oxygen saturation. How many binding sites do we have per hemoglobin molecule?

Okay. Good. Right? So if you give up one, oxygen saturation drops to about 75%.

All right. Kind of expected, right? 75% 75%.

75%. That looks good.

Right. Any opposing views? No.

What about the pressures? So.

Kind of. Okay. Right. So we said, I mean, right of pressure with reference to atmosphere.

Around zero. Right. A few millimeters of mercury, depending on where you how you measure it.

Certainly not 10 or 20. Right. That's mean right.

Atrial pressure over here. Three millimeters of mercury. Right ventricle systolic 20.

And diastolic three. Also good. Right.

Pulmonary artery 20 over eight. Also looks good.

All right. Might be a little low on this side, but, you know, I didn't give you the age of the child, right?

Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is a surrogate for left atrial pressure five.

Also reasonably low. Right left ventricle 100.

Systolic over five. And then the doubt.

We'll probably see. 120. Also looks good.

100 over 60 in the aorta. Also looks good.

So precious. Good. Oxygenation looks good. Nothing looks abnormal. Okay.

Anything abnormal? No. Not really. Right.

What's the cardiac output? Anyone computed? 3.5l per minute.

How did you do it? Oxygen consumption.

Sorry. The arterial set. Uh, how should I write it?

Uh. Or to you said arterial.

Minus the mixed venous. Okay.

Or to. Previously we had C arterial minus C mixed venous.

Right. And we said that. The vast majority of all oxygen is carried by the hemoglobin.

So if you have the maximum carrying capacity, right,

we can say what the content is on the arterial side or on the mixed venous side is the maximum carrying capacity times the saturation fraction okay.

All right. Thanks. Continue. So we have 160ml per minute of oxygen.

Right. And it's 60 ML of O2 per minute.

Divided by 200.

ML of oh two per 100.

Uh, per 1000. Per 1000ml.

Right. And then we have 0.98 -0.75.

Right. And you said this is approximately equal to 3.5l per minute.

Okay. Thank you. Lower than the five liters per minute that we said.

Sort of a rule of thumb for average adult. Right.

It's a child so likely smaller than we are.

3.5l per minute. Makes sense. Make sure that you get the.

Get the the get the units right. Okay.

Now, what was the next question? What is pulmonary blood flow?

What the [INAUDIBLE] is this? In city state.

What is pulmonary blood flow? We said everything is normal.

Should be the same, right? So should be the same.

Now remember, the way that we derived the Fig principle is that we drew a control volume around what we called the heart lung pumping unit.

Right. Right. Atrium. Right ventricle. Pulmonary circulation.

Left atrium. Left ventricle. Right. What feeds in is the inferior vena cava.

Superior vena cava. Essentially what feeds the right atrium. What goes out is the aorta.

We could have also drawn a control volume around the pulmonary circulation only meaning what feeds in as a pulmonary artery.

What comes out is a pulmonary veins.

Right now, the only thing that would have changed is these numbers over here, because we took these numbers from the aorta over here.

Right. And the right atrium in right over here.

So everything in between is in our control one.

Now, if we're only interested in the pulmonary blood flow, we would say that's what's coming out of the pulmonary blood flow.

Is this over here? And what's going into the pulmonary circulation is what's coming out over here.

The numbers stay the same. Right. So in steady state, in the absence of any abnormality over here,

obviously what has to what comes through the hard line pumping unit is also what comes through the pulmonary circulation.

No sources, no sense. Okay, so 3.5l per minute.

What about, uh, systemic vascular resistance?

By the way, I posted the notes from last time on the last lecture.

So for those of you who are asking about the, you know, the write up about the vascular resistance definitions and all that kind of stuff,

what I did at the end, it's under the the section of the last lecture under the reading material.

Systemic vascular resistance. How do we compute it. So and as you will see in those notes.

We interchangeably use systemic vascular resistance or total peripheral resistance or just arterial resistance.

Anyone computed. Mean arterial pressure minus central venous pressure.

Or here we could also say mean right atrial pressure right divided by the cardiac output.

Exactly right. What did you get. And what are the units?

17.5. 17.5.

Okay. So give me. Give me the numbers first.

What did you put on it? Over here. What did you have for me?

Material pressure. There's.

Yeah. That's good. What did you get for me? Natural pressure. Yeah.

73mm of mercury, minus. Uh, so this would not be the downstream pressure.

Right. So what we would want is. So you want to measure the resistance between what's coming out of the aorta and what's coming over here.

Right. So the pressure to use is a mean right atrial pressure because that's the

downstream pressure of the peripheral circulation right coming out of the aorta.

Everything is going through the systemic micro circulation coming back to the right atrium.

Mean of this is the upstream pressure. Mean of this or something close to this structure is the downstream pressure.

So what you would subtract over here is three millimeters of mercury.

Right. And we already have our 3.5l per minute over here.

And this comes out to be, I think, 1.2.

And what I that's what I called the peripheral resistance units or millimeters of mercury.

Times. Seconds for milliliters.

Use was higher because you had a higher number over here, right?

But mean arterial pressure minus central venous pressure or right atrial mean right atrial pressure.

Right divided by cardiac output. So we'll take this away.

1.2mm of mercury 10s over milliliters.

Any questions about that? Yeah. Sorry, I just moved this thing down while you were speaking, I.

Uh, the ministerial pressure. Good. Last time we said that, what we can do is we will approximate.

This is also in the notes that I posted. So if you want to look it up over there.

So we said that we have a waveform that looks something like this right.

It has an onset over here. And here is the next right.

This is what we call it the cycle length over here DT. And we said that this is the pressure waveform T over here.

We said that the mean of this pressure waveform is one over t zero to t u of t prime dt prime.

Remember that right. And we said that approximately our performance approximation of this is the diastolic pressure over here.

This is a systolic pressure over here. The difference between the two is what we call the pulse pressure.

But we can approximate this as a diastolic pressure plus one third times the pulse pressure, which is also the diastolic pressure,

diastolic arterial pressure plus one third of the systolic pressure minus the diastolic pressure.

Okay. Remember, that approximation will come in handy over and over and over again.

Right. We don't want to do this in our head, but we can do this in our head.

Or at least with our calculator. Okay. That's how we get from 100 over 60.

So we hit 60 plus one third of 40. And if I did that right, it should be 73.

Okay. So first of all, not no silly questions, right?

So strike that from your vocabulary. Right. If you have that question, there's probably five other people who have exactly the same question.

Okay. So what we're interested in right now is the the systemic.

But we started with this is systemic vascular resistance.

And remember that we defined the resistance as the upstream pressure minus the downstream pressure.

Divided by the volumetric flow rate through that territory of interest.

Right. If we're interested in the systemic vasculature, the upstream pressure is what is the aortic pressure is what's coming out of the heart.

Right, then it goes through all of the rest of the body's kidneys. Gut.

Skeletal muscle. Head, arms. Wherever. Right.

And the downstream pressure. Is the right atrial pressure.

Okay. So then the upstream pressure is this over here.

This is a pulsatile waveform one 100 systolic, 60 diastolic.

With this formula, we can compute the mean. Right.

The downstream pressure is already kindly given to us as a mean pressure.

So. 60, plus one third of 40.

73. Upstream pressure mean right downstream pressure three.

Cardiac output. We already calculated. Is that clear?

Look at the notes. Right. But but by the end of this lecture, we want this to be second nature.

Right. Figure out what's the vascular territory that we're interested in.

Let's see upstream pressure. What's the downstream pressure. What's the flow going through it?

Of the resistance. As I say in the notes,

one could actually compute this as an instantaneous resistance and have an instantaneous upstream pressure and instantaneous downstream pressure.

Usually we're interested in these resistances over timescales that are long compared to the positivity of the the waveform.

Right. And we'll talk about why that is the case when we talk about the control mechanisms that act over tens of seconds, maybe minutes.

So usually we're interested in the variation of this resistance over longer timescales and that possibility.

That's why we take the mean upstream pressure I mean downstream pressure over the mean flow.

Okay. All right. By the same token, now, what's the pulmonary vascular resistance?

So now we're interested in the upstream pressure of the pulmonary circulation,

the downstream pressure of the pulmonary circulation and the flow that goes through the pulmonary circulation.

So we often call this PVR or pulmonary vascular resistance.

So what would be the upstream pressure. What's the pressure feeding into the pulmonary vasculature.

It's the. So the mean pulmonary artery artery pressure.

So sometimes causes em pap.

And as I show and or point out in the in the notes whether we have mean pulmonary artery pressure or mean or artery pressure or p pa,

I mean all of these things would be used interchangeably. What's the downstream pressure?

But atrial. Left atrial pressure. So we have the mean left atrial pressure.

So this minus let's call this play.

Or we could also call this m play if you want here.

And we're still dividing by the cardiac output. Right.

So what would this be? So here we also have a pulsatile waveform with a significant pulsatile component.

Right. So what is the mean pulmonary artery pressure in this case?

MP AP is eight.

Which is the diastolic right. Plus one third of 20 minus eight.

So what is that? 12.

So this is 12mm of mercury over here.

So this is 12 minus moon right of pressure five.

And anyone compute this. 0.12mm of mercury times second divided by millimeters.

Order of magnitude lower than the systemic vascular resistance over here.

Right. So the pulmonary vascular resistance is very, very low compared to the arterial.

Or the systemic vascular resistance. What else do we have?

We have the pulmonary artery, systemic blood flow. We have the cardiac output.

Okay, good. You make sure that you take your catheter out.

Take care of the insertion site. Write your report.

Cardiac catheterization report without. Without findings. Right.

Perfectly fine. Okay?

Yeah. Correct, because there's no indication here.

But we said is whether we use if we look at the heart lung pumping unit.

Right. The arterial oxygen content or, you know, saturation over here is 98% right.

And the mixed venous is 75%. We're now interested in what comes out of the pulmonary circulation.

We said that it's also 98% over here and 75% over here.

So exactly the same calculation. Steady state.

Normal circumstances. What comes out of the heart lung pumping unit is exactly what has to go through the pulmonary circulation.

Okay. So case number two.

Take a look. Let me know what you think. Anything abnormal.

Tell me, sir. The oxygenation is the same on the right and the left side of the heart.

Not exactly, but similar right.

What's odd about the oxygenation? Number one.

Previously we said, all right, on the on the right side of the hard, we have 75% left side of the hard way, about 98%.

Yeah. Yeah.

So let's let's dissect this 76% coming in about.

Right. What do we expect 97% coming from the pulmonary circulation board.

Right, right. 97% going out over here into the aorta.

About right 91%. No.

Right. And. Correctly pointed out.

Mixed venous oxygen saturation coming into the right atrium about right.

But then we're gaining oxygen, which we don't expect.

Right. So we might this be coming from?

Yeah. So it could be a shunt from here to here.

All right. So that's could be a hypothesis right.

Working hypothesis because you have oxygenated blood coming from here.

If there's something like a forearm in a valley that hasn't closed. Right.

And we have left to right shunting of blood inside of the cardiac chambers, you would be adding.

Oxygenated blood. To the blood that's coming from.

The rest of the body that's properly or reasonably deoxygenated, and you would see an increase.

Now, once you actually in the right atrium over here, do we see another increase in the right ventricle?

No right in the 91 and 92% over here is within measurement error.

Right. So I'll leave it up to you to actually calculate this through.

Maybe we'll put it on the problem set. Right. But working hypothesis for you guys over here is.

That there might be blood somehow coming from the right, the left side to the right, from the left atrium to the right atrium.

In this case, would you expect pulmonary blood flow to be the same as the, uh.

Systemic blood flow. No. Right.

Again, if you were to apply whatever is over here.

Right, 97% coming out, 76% coming back, that's principle applied to the whole heart lung pumping unit.

Right. But now if you're interested in the pulmonary circulation.

97% coming out. 91% going in.

Right at the same oxygen carrying capacity and oxygen consumption.

So mathematically, it's already going to not going to be the same, right?

Physiologically, you think that if there is a shunt over here, you have blood coming this way, but then going this way, coming this way,

going back all the way around, this blood that's actually circulating around the pulmonary blood,

the pulmonary circulation that will not be coming out over here. So do we expect pulmonary blood flow to be larger or smaller?

Then cardiac output. It's like thumbs up lecture is going well or.

Yeah, okay, good. Okay. It's larger right? It's larger.

Yeah I like that feedback. And once you're going this way, I know that Colin should take over.

Okay. Larger. Right. Do the calculations. Convince yourselves of that.

Compute the pulmonary vascular resistance. Compute the, uh, um, systemic vascular resistance on the basis that we've done over here.

Should be clear. Okay, but there was a question here then.

Yep. So these are real measurements.

I actually took them from case cases. And so, um, a few millimeters of mercury over here I think is still within measurement error.

So you would have to very carefully calibrate.

So if you compute the pulmonary vascular resistance on the basis of that, on the basis of that it will be slightly different.

Right. But it's not going to be order of magnitude difference. But good good good good catch.

Okay. All right. So. Oh, except for atrial septal defect.

So I put this in just for, for for you to, to see what sort of gives the kind of clinical correlate.

So this these are various types of atrial septal defect that you can see.

This is as viewed from the right atrium. So this is in the old days when these were where were repaired by really having open heart surgery.

You cut the right atrium open. You look down on it. Right.

It could be something that is simply a foramen ovale.

So superior vena cava. Inferior vena cava hidden behind this, you know, uh, you know, um.

Fold over here is the, uh, coronary sinus. All right.

So superior. Inferior vena cava. It's simply a.

Uh. For in a valley that includes.

Right now this is called the fossa overlays, which means that you have a wider opening of the, um, uh, around the, um, uh.

The forum in a valley can be quite large, right?

Or can be finished traded. Small little pieces can be lowered down.

Can be investigating here into the pulmonary uh veins coming back.

Um, various types of locations that you can see in the old days, as I said, they open it up.

The Dacron patch. If you can just suture together, you just have a, you know, Dacron patch that you would cut out.

You would sutured over a patch like this, suture everything back up.

I suspect that these days, you know, a lot of these things can be done, um, without having to open the chest.

Okay. All right. This is just, you know, for the clinically interested.

So I want to give you a little bit of an overview of today's lecture.

Thursday's lecture and Wednesdays and then next Tuesday's lecture, because these lectures form a cohesive unit.

And what we are trying to do over the next three lectures is to provide you with an approach

to understand the intact function of the cardiovascular system under perturbations.

And what I'm saying over here is that there is sort of a problem.

Um, and the problem is that, uh, the cardiovascular system, like other organ systems, is actually quite complex.

In our case, it's closed loop. That's sort of what engineers know.

Open loop. Closed loop systems. Open loop system. Something goes in, the system does something.

Something comes out right.

Close loop is a little more difficult to think through because, you know, something might happen with the system, but then because it's closed loop,

you never quite know how to how it actually affects the normal thinking about a wiggle, something in the system.

Right? I put the same stuff in. How does it wiggle the output right doesn't quite work right and can be quite difficult to think through.

And there's whole areas of engineering that that look at system identification and, and dynamical systems that deal with this kind of stuff.

But cardiovascular system is closed loop. Its time, varying on multiple time scales.

All right. We're talking just about one time scale when we're talking about the pulse utility.

It is nonlinear.

And it is controlled, meaning there's various layers of control systems wrapped around it, each of which also acts on different timescales.

So a priori, it's actually difficult to understand or to to get an intuition of how the system behaves.

Now. We can write out fluid dynamics equations, we can come up with big simulations.

People have done that. We can implement all of this on a computer and then we can actually go through exercises.

What happens if we now turn this knob? What happens if we change the blood one.

Right. And these are exercise that are very valuable. You get can get a lot of intuition from that.

But what we want to do is we want to do it at a level where we can conceptually understand what's going on.

And ultimately, our goal is here to build an intuition or understanding so we can predict.

And we can control. Meaning when we can predict the behavior of the system.

We can control the behavior of the system. Now some of you will go on into biomedical device design, these kinds of things.

You want to understand the behavior of the system so that you can actually make better ventricular assist devices that are, um.

Uh. Dialysis machines. Right.

So we have to figure out how does this system behave under different loading conditions.

But some of you will become practicing clinicians right at the bedside.

You have to say, well, what if I actually gave a vasopressors? What's my intuition of how this system will actually react?

Right. So when we can predict, we can control. And what do you mean by predict?

By predict what we mean is the system is in steady state.

What happens if you perturb blood volume? What happens to blood pressure?

What happens to cardiac output? What is the new steady state? What if we change the contractility of the heart?

What if we change heart rate? What if you change the compliance of the arteries in the pulmonary circulation?

These are all what we would call parameters of the system.

Whereas pressures and flows are derived. Uh, variables that depend on the values of these parameters and that depend on the behavior of the system.

So by predict, what we mean is we can actually say, well, there's a steady state, there's a perturbation to something.

Right. And we can figure out in which direction the new steady state will actually go on.

As I mentioned last time, mostly be interested in two things. Number one cardiac output.

Number two. Blood pressure. Okay. So.

The approach that we will take is that will abstract.

We make things simpler. You make assumptions about.

The behavior of the system or about the behavior of components.

We assume steady state, not worrying about the positivity right now.

Steady state. Mean arterial pressure. Mean venous pressures.

Cardiac output. Right. We'll divide the system into essentially two major parts.

There are four major parts here the right heart, the pulmonary circulation, the left heart, and the peripheral circulation.

Right. But what we'll do is we'll abstract it even further where we said, as I already mentioned,

everything over here, we will consider the heart lung pumping unit.

Right. And we will describe it in the end as one unit where we can describe the input and the output.

Likewise, the second element is the peripheral circulation.

But we also look at the biophysics today of the peripheral circulation.

What is it? What is it made of? What's the input output relation in steady state of the peripheral circulation?

And when we talk about input output, the two variables that we will choose to describe the input output is what we call p f,

which is the feeling pressure which will be our independent variable.

And the way that we defined over here is the inlet pressure to the right heart.

So the filling pressure would be the mean right atrial pressure.

Reference to atmosphere. Okay.

That's, uh, that would be our independent variable or dependent variable will be Q would be the cardiac output.

So when? A week from today we look at the input output relationship of the heart lung pumping unit.

The question that we will ask is what is the relationship or what is the dependance of Q?

The volumetric blood flow coming through the heart lung pumping unit in steady state as a function of the filling pressure,

which is the downstream pressure. Think of this essentially as a pump.

Right. The question is how much volume is your pump giving out?

Depending on how high the pressure is of the inlet to the pump.

That's the question. Input output. Relation of the heart lung function. Pulmonary.

And all the parameters that describe the heartland pumping unit will be in that formulation cardiac contractility,

heart rate, pulmonary vascular resistance, pulmonary compliance, pulmonary venous compliance, these kinds of things.

Likewise, today we will focus on the peripheral circulation.

We will ask exactly the same question.

And the question is what is the input output relationship of the isolated peripheral circulation or the systemic circulation?

Where the independent variable is the filling pressure. And the dependent variable is the flow going through it.

Okay might seem a little odd because here the feeling pressure is actually the downstream pressure.

Actually. Sorry. The upstream pressure. It's a sorry.

It's a downstream pressure. Right. And the independent variable is the flow that's going through it.

Now. This is a spoiler. So spoiler alert.

On Tuesday when we put everything together. Having characterized the heart lung pumping unit in terms of pH or Q as a function of pH.

Right. And today, at the end of today, when we have characterized the peripheral circulation in terms of p, F, and q.

You can just hook these two pieces together, right?

Because we've characterized one part of the cardiovascular system in terms of the exact same variables as the other part of the cardiovascular.

And in steady state. Obviously, the flow that goes through here must equal the flow that's going through here.

That's why the steady state assumption is very important. Uh, we could do that.

You could do that. It gets a lot more messy if you want to do that.

So we have a choice of which pressure to use. Right, but for a variety of reasons one mathematical, two physiological.

It turns out that PFF is actually a good choice to use. But.

The choice is yours. You can try. You can.

You can try it with arterial pressure over here. Right.

And you would have the arterial pressure over here as the input here and the queue here.

Right. Then you would have the Q here in the arterial pressure over here. Turns out that the other way around is just a lot more powerful.

But the choice is ours. We can do it. You know we can do things however we want.

I will stick with and. Q as a function of p.

No, it's always the, the, the whether it's the upstream or the inlet or the outlet is different in the two,

but the PMF is always the independent variable and the cue is always the dependent variable.

Okay. All right. So then the roadmap today.

Peripheral circulation. The Heart Is a Pump comes on Thursday, where we just look at the pump performance of the isolated ventricle,

and then on Tuesday we put it all together. So with that let's start with the peripheral circulation.

As I said it's a distributed system nonlinear, time varying.

What we already do is we make a major simplification by reducing it into these essentially four elements.

Right heart. Pulmonary circuit. Left heart. Systemic circuit.

Okay. I've already went over this with you at the last lecture.

This is just to review what we mean by systemic circulation.

We have the left ventricle. Generates 120 over five 120 over eight millimeters of mercury, or systolic is 128 and diastolic pressure.

Then we have these large arteries, these Winchester vessels.

And everything from here. Through the capillary resistance vessels, the micro circulation, the post capillary, um.

Um uh uh venous vessels. Capacitance venous vessels towards the right atrium.

All of this is a systemic circulation. As we already pointed out, significant drop in arterial pressure.

Significant drop in positivity. And what we have pointed out.

Do I have this down here? Has no. Um, is that about?

If we take away the 180ml or so that's in the left heart, right.

We have about 4.2l of our five liters of blood volume residing in the systemic circulation.

So most of the blood volume. Is on the is in the systemic circulation, not in the heartland.

Pumping. Order of magnitude difference. Almost 4.5l over here and half a liter over there.

Approximately. Right. We said average person.

The average person that has about five liters per minute of cardiac output also has about five liters of blood.

Right again. Scales a little bit with, um.

With body size. Okay, I already went over this. Systemic circulation.

We can break this down conceptually even further. Right now we talked about systemic circulation.

We talked about the arterial systemic arteries. The micro circulation and then the systemic veins.

Each of them have slightly different functional units or functional properties.

If you already said here these have elastic walls. Rubber type.

Uh, wall structure. We're converting kinetic energy into potential energy through that bolus injection of about 70 75ml of stroke volume per beat.

Right. This is bolus flow from 300 milliseconds pushed.

Flow is oscillating high momentum, but there's very little pressure drop across the systemic arteries.

Large vessels. Right. The pulse wave changes.

As you go along, as we mentioned last time. But the mean arterial pressure does not change much.

Maybe millimeters of mercury. Then we get to the arterials here.

Gas exchange takes place. It's very significant resistance at the level of the arterials.

We bring the pressure down, as we said last time, at the level of the capillaries you will see we have only a single endothelial layer.

To minimize the diffusion barrier right here, as is as close as we get in terms of this is dominated laminar flow.

Probably all heard about laminar flow, about a parabolic flow profile.

I can puzzle all of of, you know, resistance scales as one over R to the fourth.

Right. We'll get to that. And for those of you who are fluid, dynamically inclined, low Reynolds number flow meaning it's viscous dominated.

Here it's momentum dominated by high Reynolds number.

Low Reynolds number. Finally in the veins.

We have large storage. These are controllable vessels.

These are also controllable vessels over here. Not so much control over here as we will see.

But there's 3.2l of the four and a half leaders or so that's in the systemic circulation is at the level of the systemic veins.

And if they're controllable in terms of how much storage they can actually take.

Or release. You can think of these as a significant source of, um.

Auto transfusion in some sense. We'll talk about this in detail when we talk about the control of the cardiovascular system.

But important. You have very significant capacitance over here, meaning ability to store blood.

They're very thin walled. They are prone to collapse outside pressure larger than the inside pressure.

And in some locations they have Venus valves. As I'm standing over here.

Right. There's Venus valves in my, uh, um, in the veins of my leg so that there's not a continuous hydrostatic column between my heart and my legs,

which would make my my feet swell significantly. So there's venous valves to actually counteract some of gravity.

And if they don't work anymore then you get into all sorts of issues.

But anyway, so Bobby and Rick probably went over this ad nauseum.

So. Intima. Media advent tissue.

Look at your pathology nodes. Right. Endothelial layer over here.

An organ in and of itself can sense shear stress, as we will see when we talk about control of the cardiovascular system.

Right. Also very important. Um. Uh, for all sorts of other reasons.

Tunica media. Smooth muscle.

Vascular smooth muscle that can constrict or relax and thereby change the filling state of veins or the resistance status of arterials.

You can clamp down as we will see, or you can sort of relax.

So at the level of the individual vascular territories you can modulate your own blood supply.

Because these are the vascular smooth muscle over here is very reactive to local metabolic and products.

We'll also see that and in vintage structural integrity, um, and um tethering.

So as we go through these different.

Um. You know, blocks of the peripheral circulation aorta.

A lot of elastin fibers. Very elastic. Right.

It had some smooth muscle. And a decent amount of collagen fibers.

But as you go towards the smaller and smaller arteries, you see that the relative contribution,

especially at the level of the pre capillary sphincter muscle sphincter vessels.

Very relatively speaking, high contribution in terms of the wall composition in terms of vascular smooth muscle.

This is the locus of. Control of the vascular resistance.

It's also the locus of control of blood flow to the local vascular territories can relax or you can constrict.

Once you're coming to the true capillary, essentially talking about a single layer of endothelial cells.

All right. So oxygen and CO2 can freely diffuse essentially across that single layer.

Don't want to have a big thick and, you know, wall at that level.

And as you get to the venules, you have the certainly always the endothelial layer.

You have the collagen fibers of the advent. But once you actually get to the to the veins, you also have smooth muscle for that volume control.

Okay. So here is a view of the micro circulation.

Um. What's the diffusion distance about?

You know, for oxygen in tissue. How far can we go so that diffusion is still viable?

Uh, transport mechanism. A meter.

What? I was going that was about to go down the orders of magnitude.

There wasn't a suggestion. Right. So it's about a hundred microns.

So if you're 100 microns away from a capillary, right. Or more likelihood is you're waiting long, very long for an oxygen to come by.

So that's why we have to have a network where the average path length is on the order of that.

Right. What we see over here is what is called arterial or a arterial over here.

The yellow things over here are, uh, the resistance of the pre capillary sphincter resistance vessels.

And this then supplies this, this very reasonably dense networks of capillaries supplies blood to whatever tissue there is.

And let me see over here. How can I put all of you to sleep?

Like this. So here what you see is, is one of those territories.

And what you see is the flow of red blood cells through these arterials onto the venous side over here.

And these are individual cells that are going through one of these vascular territories.

It's just one branch of it. And you can see that you know they're they're trying to go through here.

They're coming right. And it's not really a true true capillary because if it were a true true capillary,

usually the radius or the diameter of the of the capillary is smaller than the projected area of a red blood cell.

Because the red blood cell really has to distort in order to get through. And that further lowers the diffusion distance.

Okay. So individual cells going through over here.

But you see the relative uh, size of this is, is on the order of the diameter of, of red white blood cells going through.

Um, let me see here. We've seen this. So.

Spontaneous of motion. What you see over here.

It's a little bit difficult to see, but it's difficult to get a better. So here, here you have the vessel, right.

And you see the flow going through over here upstream and downstream.

And you see it's a superhighway right now. Right. You cannot differentiate individual cells.

But at some point here you see it's in traffic jam. Right.

And now the vessel constricts nothing going through.

Now it's opening up again. Maybe even reversing blood flow a little bit.

Right. But when it opens up you have the highway going through again.

So these these pre capillary sphincter vessels are very powerful.

They can completely shut off blood supply to a vascular territory if not needed.

Or they can just bring it in. Right. If you say all right this is an exercising muscle.

You have CO2 buildup lactic acid coming in.

These are powerful vasodilators because it signals to the rest of the cardiovascular system or essentially especially locally,

it signals I need more blood flow. Right.

And then it can just open this up. And when it's done, completely close it down.

So spontaneous was a motion of, um, the.

Um. Pretty capillary sphincter muscles.

Velocity of flow through the capillary. We have no reference.

But what do you think? Two millimeters per second point four millimeters per second, or 1.1mm per second.

Likewise, what is the transit time through a typical capillary?

0.1 seconds. 2.5 seconds. Five seconds.

We have no frame of reference. Who can guess? But it should be a uniform distribution, right?

Unless you're hedging your bets a little bit. Right? But can we compute this?

And on the basis of what principal can we compute this. I pity the poor graduate student.

Who had to tabulate all of this.

Right. But since it is out there, we use it. This is from the dog, where someone went through sort of the morphometric and looked at the diameter.

Or estimated the number one with the area or do. You don't have to estimate, you can just count.

Right. The cross-sectional area, the length, and the total volume.

We also know the flow velocity over here. One thing you see is that as you go down towards the capillaries, obviously the cross the diameter.

Therefore the cross-sectional area goes down dramatically. But the number goes up is proportionate.

So that the total cross-sectional area across all of these elements is actually very significant.

So if we have the mean aortic flow and we have the cross-sectional area and we have the total cross-sectional area at these different levels,

we can apply the principle of continuity. Again conservation of mass the same way that we conserved oxygen.

When we talked about the thick principle. What goes in has to come out right.

No sources or things. So in integral form, what you have over here is you integrate the area over the velocity profile.

Right. But as a poor man, what we say is the area times the mean velocity over here is equal to the area times the mean velocity over here.

And then has to be equal to the flow rate. Okay.

Makes sense. What comes in has to come out. So when we do this.

The velocity through a cut through a single capillary. Is about half a millimeter per second.

It takes him a second to get half a millimeter and it's fairly, fairly low.

We said what we want to do is if we want to have short diffusion distances, right.

But the other thing about diffusion is that you want to give it a long period of time.

But you want to give it time to unload the oxygen and pick up the CO2.

Right. So what is that time? The transit time through a typical peripheral capillary.

About 2.5 seconds. Now is that large?

Is that small? It's Bill kettle. Still teaching endocrinology.

Right. Did he summarize all of medicine into three things?

Yeah. What is this? No.

So when I took it, something can be too high. Something can be too low or something can be funny looking.

That's all of medicine. I think Doctor Stoltz would disagree, but.

Yeah, right. So is this high? Is this low or is this funny looking?

We don't know yet. Right. But you probably heard, so sorry.

Before I get to that. Sorry. This I jumped ahead. Relative area over here.

Mean velocity over here. So relative area with reference to the aorta.

Total cross-sectional area going up significantly. Right.

Mean velocity going down significantly. All right.

So at the level of the capillaries, short diffusion distances long timescales.

It takes a long time to get through. And you might have heard in, in, in, in pulmonology or in respiratory already.

Maybe you'll hear it later. The concept of diffusion limited stayed versus perfusion limited stayed.

So this is in a capillary along the pulmonary circulation.

The mixed venous partial pressure of oxygen around 40, alveolar partial pressure of oxygen about 100.

So over that transit time of a single arrest reside going through a pulmonary capillary.

You want to have enough time to take up the oxygen to equilibrate with the alveolar oxygen.

Right. That happens on a timescale of about one third.

If you look just at O2 over here under normal conditions. This is the time it takes to traverse the pulmonary capillary.

Previously we looked at the systemic capillaries. So it's a little bit different right.

But it only takes about one third of the transit time to fully equilibrate.

Oxygen. With the alveolar space.

Meaning that you have a 2 to 1 redundancy over here.

So this is a perfusion limited state. You're not limited by the timescale of diffusion.

That can be very different if you have fibrosis or pulmonary edema where the diffusion barrier becomes large.

Right. But in a normal circumstances we have perfusion limited not diffusion limited.

Meaning how much flow the cardiovascular system can push through the lungs determines how much oxygen you can pick up.

And that goes back to one of the slides that I showed last time workload on the x axis,

cardiac output on the y axis and oxygen uptake, cardiac output.

We're mirroring each other pretty much same slope okay.

All right. So let me see what I should break over here.

Um first mathematics and then coffee or first coffee and then mathematics I think coffee which should should come first.

All right. So we'll take but just take a ten minute break. We'll be back at 1140, please.

We still have a lot of stuff to get through. The microphone.

Okay. So one of the things that we have to talk about briefly when we talk about the micro circulation is transport of solutes,

solvents across the membrane. So there's not going to be much mathematics over here.

But I just want to clarify some concepts.

Let's say we have a beaker. Right.

And this. Some water in that beaker.

We have a membrane between the two compartments. And what we'll do is we will put a solute in this side of the beaker.

And let's also assume that that membrane that we have is permeable.

To that particular salute. If we let this now, if we go home for the weekend and we come back.

What happened to the concentration on one side, to the other? Equilibrate right by exactly that diffusive process that we have over here.

So we have a diffusive process.

In the end, it should be exactly the same, right, modulo some fluctuations that are very difficult to measure.

Right. Diffusive equilibrium. Now what happens, though, if.

We put in our solute, but our membrane is permeable to water but not to the solute.

What happens then? Okay, everybody. What?

It will go rushing in. Okay, we'll come back after our weekend.

Right. And what we will measure is that the level of water has increased over here

and has decreased over here in an effort to equilibrate the concentrations.

Osmosis. Right. Uh, diffusion is the movement of solute in a in a medium, and osmosis is the movement or the equilibration of solvent.

So. We're not going to go into much detail over here other than to say that the.

The degree to which this happens is dependent on the total concentration C of sigma over here.

The details of the notations are not not important, but it's essentially the sum over all the non usable solvent A solid molecules.

Right. And properly multiplied with various constants.

This is given as an osmotic pressure, meaning it's the pressure.

Essentially the hydrostatic pressure that it generates above the level of the other side.

Right. So when we're talking about movements of water, of solvent,

there's obviously a convective process that has to do with hydrostatic differences through a permeable membrane.

The pressure on one side is it's higher than the pressure on the other side.

And water can flow across that boundary.

You will have a convective flow right. Likewise if you have.

A difference in osmotic pressures. In solid concentrations, you can also induce a flow that is purely driven by the osmotic pressure differences.

Yeah. No.

Because as as the water level rises on one side, there's a hydrostatic pressure that increases that will resist the flow in the other direction.

Right. So how do we apply this?

So why is it important in the context of the of the, um. Um, uh, micro circulation.

We have the arterial side of one of those capillaries that I showed in the video.

And we have the venous side. The hydrostatic pressure is higher slightly on the hydrostatic on the on the arterial side than on the venous side.

So based on the hydrostatic pressure difference between also the inside and the outside,

higher on the inside, lower on the outside, there's a net filtration of plasma outer filtrate.

Or for fluid to leave these the vessels.

On the arterial side, and as the blood flows, the resist the resistive drop.

The pressure goes down and there is then a net force, hydrostatic force over here to bring fluid back into the capillary.

We're not talking about oxygen. When I talk about CO2, we're talking about actual.

Plasma alter filtrate to leave water, right?

Now there's also a higher on cortical osmotic pressure inside the cells over here than outside.

We have cells, we have proteins, we have albumin, we have all sorts of stuff in our blood, right, that give rise to the concentration difference.

They usually do not leave that capillary so they give rise to an osmotic pressure.

So why the hydrostatic pressure difference across the capillary wall pushes fluid out?

The osmotic pressure tries to recruit fluid back. And as your as, as you're flowing down this capillary.

Right. Because there is a resistive drop in pressure. The hydrostatic pressure component gets lower.

You're losing fluid which further concentrates.

The sort of unit parcel of volume that travels along, which makes the hydroxy on chaotic pressure over here even larger,

making that pool of water back into the circulation stronger.

Right. So in addition to the nutrient exchange that we have with oxygen and CO2.

Right. We also have a fluid exchange with the interstitial fluid space.

Now does everything that gets filtered out over here get reabsorbed over here.

No. Right. Where does it go? Are we all swelling up with fluid?

This lymphatics? Exactly right. So we have the lymphatics that essentially mops up everything else, right?

That little difference. We're talking about five liters per minute of cardiac output.

Right. We're talking probably on the order of milliliters, two liters per day in terms of the lymphatic flow.

Okay. So the lymphatics is also on the, you know, control.

It also has these vessels. So it pumps things back and it goes into the thoracic duct and it gets back into the venous circulation over here.

You've talked probably about the lymphatics in pathology, in cancer biology.

We'll talk a lot about about, uh, lymphatics. Yeah. Yep.

It's pretty much the same for our our intent, for all intents and purposes, here to say.

And I would use it interchangeably. So suffice it to say that if the lymphatics don't work anymore, for whatever reason.

Then we can get into trouble. And it can also be a sign of problems with hydrostatic pressures and chaotic pressures.

And if it's a problem with hydrostatic pressure,

the factor becomes the problem of the cardiovascular system and can be a sign and symptom of deficiencies of the cardiovascular system.

So what we call this edema and what can cause edema.

Processes, but processes. Yeah, right.

So blockage within the veins. And what would that do that would increase the pressure over here.

Would not would, would resist recruitment of of of blood.

Okay. What else? Yeah.

Low on pressure. So you don't you have less of that on pull.

What else? How many people are playing contact sports over here?

Like soccer. I mean, the American type of football. Right.

Anybody ever been kicked against the ankle? What happens?

It's. Well, it's up. Right? Why does it smell? The information comes later.

But no, it's not the information. Fluid buildup.

But what gives the fluid buildup? Trauma.

Trauma. The capillary becomes leak leaky right that that boundary between the two compartments.

Right. So increased capillary hydrostatic pressure venous valve failure and gravity.

Right. We talked about venous valves.

If they fail you can actually swell up high central venous pressure could be due to a heart that's not working properly.

Right. Blockage to venous flow was mentioned. What else do we have.

We have low and chaotic pressure inadequate protein production starvation liver

disease excess loss of protein if your kidneys are not working properly.

Capillary wall damage in which and then obstruction of the lymphatic so it can.

Edema. Peripheral edema can be unilateral. That can be bilateral over here.

Here you see unilateral right here you see bilateral.

And what is also called pitting edema. You might have heard about this.

So one thing to do. So if you actually take your form or whatever part of your body is currently available to you, right, you can press in.

And when you do this it bounce right back. Right. Very elastic.

Just immediate rebound. Now if you are pushing into these edema over here you're sort of slowly pushing in.

And then you take your thumb off and you see that this indentation actually leaves your this,

this plasticity of the of the tissue has become a lot more viscoelastic than elastic, right, by all that fluid accumulation.

And this can be then used as a staging mechanism for plus whatever pitting edema.

On chaotic. Does someone know what this means in in English?

Yeah. What does it. So the disease when the new baby is born.

Why is the disease when the new baby is born? Exactly right.

So the mother will stop breastfeeding this. You know. You know, fruit nature's diet from the mother stops.

Right. And the baby is malnutrition. Malnutrition has, you know, it makes these distended bellies right.

That is also known as a series. So water accumulation in the belly because there's protein, uh, malnutrition.

Right. These things know nephrotic syndrome over here where the, uh, inadequate, um, loss of protein and, you know, through the kidneys.

Trauma is the ankle, right?

Beasting over here. This can also then be the, the, um, inflammation inflammatory response that we've seen.

Right. Lymphedema. Uh, the old days, radical mastectomy where you went in and you essentially took out all the lymphatics on that side,

right of, of of the affected side of the breast.

And what you see over here, you have no drainage left on that side.

Right. People have become a lot more nimble about this. And then a parasitic infiltration.

Elephantiasis, um, and, uh, parasite that infiltrates the um, uh, uh, lymphatic system and leads to obstruction.

Okay, so, so much for the micro circulation coming back to our our main purpose of the lecture over here,

when we look at this diagram that we've shown now a few times,

we think of the arteries of the systemic arteries as these large capacitance and elastic vessels over here and everything that we see over here,

whether the pre capillary resistance, uh, vessels, particularly sphincters,

capillary vessels with it, uh fluid and and and uh, uh nutrient exchange takes place.

All of this is dumped into this box over here.

Right. Arterials, capillaries, venules, micro circulation.

This is our micro circulation. And then we have the veins over here.

We've talked now about the micro circulation and the first level of abstraction that we're now doing towards

sort of that modeling goal that I've stated at the beginning of the lecture is to do what we've already done,

last lecture. All the gory details that I've just went through and spent 45 minutes explaining to you.

We dump into a single resistive element. Right.

Very significant abstraction, right? But one which allows us to actually build the kind of model that we want to build.

Meaning that in terms of the biophysical properties, setting aside all of that exchange that have just talked about starting, you know, uh,

starting forces across the capillary membrane is from a system level perspective, we're interested in flows, volumes and pressures on average.

The significance of the micro circulation. It's it's a significant locus of resistance.

All right. And we already said that we can compute the resistance as the pressure difference upstream minus downstream pressure over the flow.

Right. It's all sort of constitutive relationship here.

Now, I already alluded to the fact that some of you might have background in fluid dynamics and,

and, and know all about Euler and Bernoulli and all Stokes equations and all that kind of stuff.

And you have beautiful boundary conditions, no wall movement, uh, incompressible flow and, and, uh, single phase flow.

You can actually compute the resistance. Of a tubular segment.

Pipe flow.

Essentially right laminar pipe flow, where the resistance is related to the length and the viscosity, and one over the radius to the fourth power.

Which is a very strong relationship. Now we will invoke this very sparingly because.

Technically nowhere in the body is it actually applicable. We will only invoke it when we talk about the.

A relative changes in resistance in control by a constriction of the large arteries,

and the large veins have really no consequence on vascular resistance.

Simply because the one over R to the fourth is so large that even if you have a ten whatever percent change in the in the diameter, right?

The r, the radius to begin with so large is going to not going to have any difference.

Now, if you have a capillary or if you have a pre capillary swing to where the R is very small right, then the resistance modulation can be very high.

90% of the time for our discussion, we mean 95% of the time for our discussion.

We say simply at this level we will not unroll, unfold this are any further.

This are being the resistance. Just take it as a lumped.

Constant resistance for now. All right.

But I did want to mention this because you probably see it in all the textbooks. So we've already gone through this estimating peripheral resistance.

The pressure difference mean arterial pressure around 90 to 100.

Mean right atrial pressure or central venous pressure.

Single digits. Low single digits. Here we assume five. Cardiac output five liters per minute.

The stroke volume about 83. 70 to 80ml per second.

The resistance about one peripheral resistance units. And here we have these dynes per centimeter to.

I'm second centimeter to the fifth. So. For reference.

We said five liters per minute is the flow rate. Don't confuse that with five liters of blood.

Right? One is the flow rate, the other one is a volume. Just happens to be approximately the same numerical value.

But keep these concepts separate in your head. Again with the relative vascular resistance in the circulation.

Again. Aorta. Large arteries, mean arterial branches.

Um. Um, probably should say main arterial branches, not mean arterial branches.

Terminal branches very significantly here at the level of the pre capillary sphincters and the capillaries.

When the vessels are very small resistance is very high. Right.

So the total vascular resistance on the peripheral circulation.

Is. Mostly in the micro circulation.

Very little on the venous side, you know, sort of intermediate on the large artery side, but very significantly at the arterials in the capillaries.

Then you. It also depends on how many parallel pathways you have, right?

It sort of is like parallel resistances.

That goes back to the dog. Right? That tabulation. Right.

So you have a lot more parallel pathways over here than you have over here.

But you're right. The resistance depends. It depends on the diameter. But it also depends on how many of those are in parallel.

Exactly right. Okay, so now all of this is dumped into a single resistance.

Now we have to deal with the arteries over here, and we have to deal with the veins over here.

And we'll talk about the biophysics of those. Run, usually side by side.

The first thing that we'll talk about is the distance ability. So we talked about the arteries that they have, the elastin that they have.

They are dispensable. They actually take that whole stroke volume and they expand.

And then during the diastolic phase they slowly sort of recoil.

And if we look at the relative volume as a function of pressure.

Right for the art, for the aorta and for the vena cava.

The relative volume is at zero. Millimeters of mercury inside pressure.

You see that we can pressurize the arteries to much, much, much higher levels and we can pressurize the vein.

Think of the sensibility of that balloon. Right? You blow into the balloon, you have a certain distance ability.

You have a compliance. We make that concept clear mathematically.

Right now. If you blow in and you blow India, you blow in. Eventually you reach the elastic limit.

If you blow too much, it'll burst, right? And that's what you see over here.

The higher you have kind of a linear phase and then it plateaus.

All right. Same for the vena cava. You have a linear phase that is steeper in these relative units.

But then it sort of plateaus off at about. You know, in this case we had 20 20cm of water.

So. The slope of this is a compliance.

Right here you can go to much, much higher levels.

Which makes sense because on the arterial side, we are pressurized to about 100cm, millimeters of mercury.

Right here we are only pressurized about ten millimeters of mercury.

Five, maybe ten. Okay. So the vascular distance ability of the two.

Very different. But I also want to point out is the venous vascular distance ability and collapse.

So this is taken from data. Uh, that yours truly personally digitized from a a a publication from the 1940s.

Where, uh, it's a vascular segment, a venous vascular segment.

And what you can see over here is that at zero millimeters trans mural pressure inside pressure minus outside pressure,

you have a very sudden collapse. It's almost like a switch.

You're above zero. And you're distended, right?

You're below zero and you have almost nothing. Right.

That's vascular collapse of venous vessels.

So the the arteries are very rubbery like. The veins.

Very, very thin walled.

If the outside pressure becomes larger than the inside pressure, so the trans mural pressure becomes negative, they tend to collapse.

All right. So they can withstand a negative pressure. They don't have any wall tension.

Um. Um, of any significance?

Right. Collapse the moment that you get to zero. Well, at zero.

That's it. Right. This.

These are static measurements. Now, how do we model this?

So the way that we model these vascular segments, whether it's an artery or whether it's a vein, essentially like a rubbery tube.

All right, but any type of tube. You have a volume.

That. It's called the zero pressure filling volume or the dead space volume.

Meaning that you're there's a certain volume that you can actually push in before the walls get stretched.

Before the wolves generate any tension. Tension. Here we call, um, uh, this tension.

Right. Active tension that's being generated.

But there's a certain volume if you have a if you have a plastic bag or something, you think of it, you can put it on the table.

Right. And the inside pressure of the plastic bag is exactly the same as the outside pressure.

So the transmitted pressure is zero. But the two might not be, the plastic bag might not be collapsed.

Whatever you have there is the zero pressure filling void.

Right. And then you can push more and more volume in. At some point that plastic bag will actually stretch.

And so active tension is being generated. So that's zero pressure filling volume.

It's the maximum volume to which you can fill the vascular segment or your plastic bag before any wall tension is being generated.

Right. Then there's usually an elastic portion.

The more volume you push in. The more tension is being or pressure is being generated.

Right. And then there's usually an elastic limit.

So you can try to push more in. But but you keep the pressure doesn't increase.

Sorry that the volume doesn't increase. You reach the elastic.

Limit the filling capacity. Right? That slope over here is what we call the capacitance.

It's the change in volume with the change in pressure. That's our definition.

You can call it the incremental compliance or capacitance. We're not differentiating between that.

It's essentially we will operate for all intents and purposes on this linear part of this slope over here.

So that's what we call vascular capacitance change in volume over change in pressure.

You have a high capacitance. That means you have a very floppy structure, meaning you can store a lot of volume with very little change in pressure.

You have a very low capacitance. It's very akin to a very stiff spring.

Right. So this is equivalent to the to the hook spring constant.

Right. Okay. So estimating the arterial capacitance.

Right. The stroke volume is about 70 80ml per minute.

And the pulse pressure is about 4120 over 80.

Right. So we can estimate the lumped arterial capacitance at about two milliliters per millimeters of mercury.

Remember what we're doing is we're pushing 80ml over a very short period of time into that whole arterial treat right.

We assume that over that period of time there's no runoff into the periphery.

And from the beginning of that ejection to the end of the ejection, the arterial pressure has increased by 40mm of mercury from 80 to 120.

So that 40mm of mercury was needed in order to accommodate the 80ml that we've pushed in.

All right. So we can compute delta v over delta p.

And that turns out to be about two milliliters per millimeters of mercury.

That's the entire large arterial system. Okay.

And doctor students ask you in the first lectures, like how many of us already have signs of of of cardiovascular diseases and the.

The truth of the fact is, you know, all, all of us in some sense.

And how does it manifest itself systemically at a macro physiological level, at the level of the arterial distance ability?

We want our arteries to be nice and dispensable. We want that slope to be large.

So the vast majority of you are probably operating here or near right.

Some of us are approaching some of these categories from the wrong direction.

Right. So some of us are operating here. Well, we don't have anybody here.

Right. But you will see this is just postmortem. This is not necessarily pathological.

These are post mortem specimens of trauma victims. Right.

You can see how this actually changes already in early in life.

That the distance ability. The position of.

All sorts of things in your vascular wall already decreases, and we'll have a lot more to talk about when we talk about atherosclerotic diseases.

Yeah. Correct.

So here. So the slope here is still positive.

Right. The slope is always positive. All right.

We're not coming back down this way. So the capacitance, even even when the pressure transport pressure is negative, the slope is still positive.

It's the change in the pulse pressure. It's the change in the transfer pressure.

We assume that the outside pressure is zero, right?

If we say the trends, more pressure here at the end of diastole is 80mm of mercury at systole is 120mm of mercury.

Right. So then the difference between the two is still 40 because the outside pressure hasn't changed.

It'll drop out. But it's a good question. Okay.

So what about. So we currently talked about the arterial system over here.

Now we have the pressure on this axis and the volume on this axis.

We have to flip this around in your head a little bit.

So if this is now the zero pressure filling volume of the entire arterial system about 500 cc's.

Right. And this. Is the pressure volume relationship or volume pressure relationship of the arterial system.

This is the systemic arteries. These.

Of the systemic veins, meaning that we have zero pressure filling volume.

That is a lot larger than on the arterial system.

And we have a capacitance. That is a lot higher on the arterial.

So if you think of storage vessels again, we think of the systemic veins.

Right. If you look at the plastic vessels, you think of the systemic arteries.

But the vast majority of our blood volume in the systemic circulation resides on the venous side.

So. Voila. This is then our model of the peripheral circulation.

All resistance resides on the level at the level of the micro circulation.

That's the only that the vast majority of the resistance over here.

Right. We have a capacitive element over here that relates to the elastic properties of the large arteries.

And we said this is on the order of two milliliters per millimeters of mercury.

We have likewise a capacitive element at the level of the venous circulation.

Right. That capacitance is an order of magnitude.

Factor of 50. Larger than that of the arterial side.

Right. And then we have a tiny resistance to venous return over here.

And that is mostly because. So that we have a difference between the PV and the PV.

Right. So blood flows in steady state from here encounters a very significant resistance.

Arterial pressure, usually much larger than the venous pressure. I mean, over here, probably around 90, maybe mean over here, probably about five.

This, for all intents and purposes, the filling pressure mean right atrial pressure on the order of zero.

Right. This two milliliters from millimeters of mercury.

This. 100. We're only representing the elastic properties here.

If these kinds of symbols are not. Do not be scared.

Right. Really, this all represents just the fluffiness of the vessels over here, right?

It's just like, as I said, it's just like a Hooke's law. It's like, how stiff is this thing, right?

This is how much resistance has this thing. Again.

How stiff is this thing? How much resistance is there between the the systemic veins and the right atrium?

It's just it's just a graphical representation of the kinds of things that we've already.

And now they are constitutive. Laws that come with it, right?

The flow through. The resistance obeys what you might want to call Ohm's law.

Right. The flow into the capacitance.

Obeys essentially the constitutive relationship of the capacitance.

We will not even go that far. Now.

The class is very quiet. Right?

Yes. So what?

Uh, you mean RC and RC?

Parallel. We're here. Uh, you.

So your question is, why don't we.

Why don't we have it? This way.

Is this your question? Like. Uh, so your question then is, is.

This. We'll get to that.

So. So your question is we could also model something like this.

Right. Yeah. Okay.

So if you do that, you will have a steady state flow into the interstitium.

Right now. If you want to really model the flow exchange with the Interstitium, you can do that.

Right? Right now we are ignoring the flow into the interstitium. Remember, we have steady state flow over here, right?

So we we don't have fluid loss essentially into the tissue.

That's what what is outside over here is essentially the tissue pressure which we assume to be zero.

Yeah. Yeah.

So that you would have it over here. Two of what?

In parallel. Like this.

And then. And then. Oh, this.

Like this. I guess it doesn't work like.

So what this means is that this is the outside pressure with our tissue pressure.

But this represents that elasticity, right?

Meaning that you have an internal pressure which is pressurized by the arterial system.

Right. That's our arterial pressure. Right. And what this element represents, the way that the topology is laid out over here,

is the elasticity of that vessel with respect to the outside pressure, which is essentially tissue pressure, which is essentially zero pressure.

Okay. The external pressure.

Tissue pressure is zero. And that is a very good assumption for most tissues except for the brain.

Right now, if you have something like this over here, you can you would, you know,

could model something like the viscoelastic nature of some of these vessels.

We want to simplify. We do not want to. Make it more complex.

Okay. So what this represents is the flopping.

This is is the wall elasticity. Right.

This is the resistance to blood flow through the micro circulation.

The elasticity of the veins. Extensibility.

Compliance. The resistance to venous return to the right heart.

That's it. Okay. So.

You we say this. Yeah, I already pointed this out. So this here, this this sensibility is what's captured here.

All of that has already indicated the resistance is captured by this resistive element over here.

Right. And this, this sensibility of this capacitance vessel over here with this resistance to venous return is captured over here.

Okay. Now I left the best for the last, if you will, because we still have to express the flow rate.

As a function of the filling pressure. Okay, so strap yourselves in.

All of this is in your notes, by the way. So this is the reading for you. So.

So really. We want to relate the flow rate right to the independent variable, which is our filling pressure.

And the parameters of the system, which is RVCa and the total volume and the total zero pressure filling one.

Right. So. Nothing of this is magic.

The pathway to get there. Will takes us through a few equations.

They're all in your book. The end product is more important than the path over here.

All right. So let me explain to you how we do it. As I said, it's spelled out in great detail in the course notes that we assign for reading.

The most important thing in the end is the functional form.

And we'll explain it intuitively. Right. So bear with me for the next two slides.

Blood volume. We have the total zero pressure filling volume V naught, which is made up the zero pressure filling volume of the arteries and veins.

We're only talking about the peripheral circulation, by the way. We're not talking about pulmonary circulation.

I'm talking about the heart. Right. Only peripheral circulation. Keep that in mind.

Total blood volume is T and the descending volume is the total volume minus the total pressure filling volume.

So far, so good. Okay. Cool.

All right. So. This is important.

Everything is important. Let's assume we're in steady state, right?

Blood is coming through the peripheral circulation at five liters per minute.

And then we go in and we clamp. No more inflow.

No more outflow. While this is going in steady state. Right.

That arterial pressure over here obviously is larger than this venous pressure over here because we have a big fat resistance sitting here.

Right. There's resistive drops over here 90mm of mercury maybe about five millimeters of mercury right.

But now we come in and we say clamp. Boom. No more inflow.

No more outflow. What will happen to these two?

Precious. They will equilibrate.

Right. Because there's no more flow quote coming in.

So there is no more replenishing over here for what is running off over here, right?

This pressure will come down. This pressure will go up until both of them are equal.

And there's no more flow through the system. Intuitively makes sense, right?

So this is just the math to explain that. Well, we're saying if all flow goes to zero.

Eventually all pressure is equilibrate, meaning that PA is equal to p, f is equal to PV, and this pressure will give a separate name.

We will call it the mean systemic pressure.

How many of you have been in a cardiac catheterization lab or a intensive care unit where someone was catheterization?

The heart stopped. Nobody.

Okay. The pressure. Well, as we will show you decreases very neatly, exponentially.

But it will not decrease to zero. It will decrease to what we call the mean systemic pressure.

Right. So. The volumes.

I constant. Right. It's a total volume doesn't change.

This is the arterial volume. PA times ka. Plus the zero pressure filling volume.

So this is what we call the stressed or descending volume. Plus the zero pressure filling volume on the arterial side plus the venous volume,

which is the stress volume on the venous side, or descending volume on the Venus side,

which is the pressure on the venous in terms of compliance, plus the venous zero pressure filling volume that makes up the total volume.

Right. So when all these pressures are the same. Right.

Then we can impute for PA, PMS and PvP PMS and we can resolve this for PMS.

And we can say the mean systemic pressure is simply given by the total descending volume.

We total minus total zero pressure filling volume over the total compliance.

That's the definition of the mean systemic pressure. Yeah.

This year. So no, this is just the definition of V not it's a total zero pressure filling volume.

It's just combining these two. Yeah. Yeah. No. Good question.

Right. I'm just saying this is maybe I should say T over here for total.

Right. So what we're saying is that the pressure that the system will equilibrate to is the total disk standing volume over the total capacitance.

Nothing to do with resistance because all flows have ceased, right?

It's just a measure. It's some sense. It's just a measure of how much volume have we pushed in over the total compliance?

It's essentially that balloon analogy. Okay.

You could also say the total capacitance, right, is the mean systemic pressure over the descending volume.

And then we're back to that constitutive relationship of the capacitance. Yeah.

You're. Is that we've always had.

See? What allows you to get rid of the delta?

Yeah. So what we're saying over here is if this is the transfer pressure over here, right?

This is the volume over here. We're saying this is our arterial or venous zero pressure filling volume.

And then we have sort of a linear part over here. Right.

And it goes back to the same question that was asked previously.

We make the assumption that's let's say for the arterial side that this is petrol pressure minus the outside pressure.

Uh, pressure which is sort of tissue pressure. Which we essentially setting to zero.

Okay. And then this here is our slope. Right.

So what we're saying over here is if we are pressurized to a certain level over here.

Right. Then the corresponding volume is our zero pressure filling volume plus whatever.

You know delta you know P times the compliance over here.

That's what we're saying over here, right? The total volume of the vascular segment is made up by the zero pressure filling volume.

That intercept over here, plus the linear slope times.

The times the pressure. Okay. So I mean systemic pressure that definition is on your homework assignment.

And one of the first problem. That gives you an indication of how important that is or will be.

Okay, so. Magic happens, right?

And in the end, we have a red box. He is.

So what are we trying to do? Right? Let's not lose focus here, right?

Let's not be scared. Let's not lose focus. We're trying to express Q.

The flow rate is a function of p f and all the parameters of the system.

Right. So we need to get rid of PA and we need to get rid of PV because PA and PV, we could express it in terms of those.

I don't know who asked that question. Right. We could express it in terms of those pressures as well, but we chose PV.

Right. So we need to express PA and PV. We need to get rid of them.

And we need to somehow express them in terms of the parameters of our system.

RVCa vetoed us, vetoed a zero pressure fitting one.

That's it. That's our task, right? So how do we do this?

Previously, we dealt with the fact that Q is zero. We clamp.

If Q is not zero, then we can express the flow through this in Steady State's PA minus p over r a plus RV.

You're with me, right? And then we just resolve this exact equation for PA.

Because we want to get rid of you. Likewise, we can say in steady state the flow through just this branch is p v minus p f over the flow.

Right. You're with me as well, right?

No magic so far. This is not like, you know, I'm trying to. Hide something here, right?

So then we resolve this for p f. Sorry for p v.

Right. First equation over here is the flow from pa to p f.

The second equation is just from PV to PV, and we resolve this for PV.

Now we can plug this into the corresponding descending volumes.

All right. So what we're saying over here is Paca plus PVC.

V is our total descending volume, which is total volume in is total zero pressure filling volume.

Right. And we know that this has to be equal to PMS times C.A plus CV as the total volume is conserved.

Right. And then we just rearrange all of this. I leave that to your own reading.

All right. And in the end, what we come up with is this equation.

So, I mean, we can do this, right? We can substitute this part over here for PA.

This is what we're doing over here. We substitute this part over here for PV.

We're doing this over here, and then we're just fiddling around.

Right? Then we are expressing we're expressing the the the the Q ultimately.

So in this equation here already in this equation over here.

We haven't applied anything other than the constitutive relationship for the flow through the resistance.

We have fcv, q rs, RVCa, RV r, cv, PMS, caa cv.

No more PA. No more PV. We're done.

All we have to do is resolve it for CU as a function of PV.

Really no magic. So take take take, take ten minutes. 15 minutes.

Didn't count way. Look at it in your notes. It should be clear.

If it's not clear, come to us and ask us. Right.

But all we're trying to figure out what is the flow going through that system as a function of the downstream pressure.

Do I have this here? So the important thing over here is the flow.

What is that functional relationship? Right. The flow is given by a pressure difference.

Over. A weighted sum of the resistances.

It looks very, very similar to what we've had before. Upstream pressure minus downstream pressure over resistance.

That's the flow. Right or resistance is pressure difference overflow.

The only difference is this is not the arterial pressure over here.

And this is the feeling pressure over here. If that were the case, arterial pressure minus filling pressure over RA plus RB.

But we would still have the problem that we have PA in there which is a dependent variable.

We got rid of PA and PV, and the functional form still looks exactly the same.

That's why I say fear not. Right, because the functional form is the same.

A pressure difference over some weighted sum of resistances.

Right. Just that the mean systemic pressure, the one that we calculated previously as a total descending volume of the sum of the capacitances,

now plays the role of the upstream pressure. But remember that the mean systemic pressure itself is just the parameter.

Right. It's. It's given by the total volume.

Total descending total descending volume over the total capacitances.

This is where the volumes are encapsulated and the compliances in here.

What we're saying is RA is weighted by CA with the A+, CB plus RB, so it's still a pressure difference over a resistance sum.

It's just. By eliminating PA and PV.

We've brought in these parameters. And that weighting gives almost equal weight to the array into the RV.

The total volume is a parameter that's given. I give you the total volume.

I give you the total pressure filling volume. I give you the resistance, RVCa and CV.

So in that point you can compute PMS.

Right. And you know the denominator over here. Right.

We said PFF is a downstream pressure. It plays the role of the downstream pressure in our final formula.

Yeah. You are in steady state.

So what you're saying is because we clamped. Right.

The clamping condition is just. It's just a way to define intuitively PMS.

I could have defined PMS exactly in the same way without making reference to the clamping.

It's just the clamping was was just a way to actually motivate how to actually get at PMS, what PMS physiologically is.

It's the pressure to which the, the, the, um, the PA and PV converge in the absence of flow.

Okay. Okay. So let's look at this diagrammatically because it might be become more intuitive.

Right. And there's there's a twist to this story. So here's our Q on the x axis right.

Here's our feeling pressure. This is our independent variable. Here we have our dependent variable.

Okay. If our feeling pressure is equal to PMS.

What's the flow? Zero, right?

Mathematically, zero if PMS plays the role of an upstream pressure, if the downstream pressure is equal to the upstream pressure, we have no flow.

Now let's say this is PMS, right?

And now what I'll do. I'm lowering the downstream pressure.

What's going to happen to Flor? It's going to go up.

Right. So I started with FX being PMS. There's no flow going through because the upstream and downstream pressure are the same.

Now if I lower the downstream pressure, I will increase the flow going through the system, right?

So if I start at PMS at zero and now I actually lower the filling pressure.

The flow is going to go up. By how much?

Well, it's given by the slope. Right, and the slope is minus one.

Divided by. This resistance term.

Right. It goes up and up and up. Lower and lower and lower the downstream pressure.

Right. It's like a pipe. If you keep the upstream pressure the same, but you lower and lower.

Lower the downstream pressure, you have more flow going through or constant resistance.

Right. You go up up up up up up up up up.

Until this point. And that's where the twist comes in. So up until zero.

Are we cool? Right. We have a pressure difference.

In the numerator, we have a resistance term in the denominator and the flow is the pressure over the resistance.

No big deal. The functional form looks a little funky, right?

But we will get used to it. The other funky thing is it's not par.

That's the upstream pressure. It's PMS in this formulation, because we threw out par and we threw out PV.

And PMS is only dependent on the total compliance and the total volumes in the peripheral circulation.

Right. But within that framework, as we lower the pressure, the feeling pressure or independent variable,

right, that return that flow through the peripheral circulation is going up.

Right. What happens at zero.

And the pH is the mean right atrial pressure with reference to the atmosphere.

At zero. What happens to Venus structures.

They collapse. Right. So at zero there's a breakpoint now.

They collapse. But it's not a form of static collapse.

Because. What you have.

Now, what I showed you earlier is, is a segment of, of vascular wall.

Right. And of that vascular wall, if you have the outside pressure statically larger than the inside pressure, you have that collapse.

Right. You saw that sudden drop right here.

It's slightly different situation. Here.

What happens? Is best described this way.

Let's say you have a vascular segment that has a certain length. Again, you have a downstream pressure.

You have an upstream pressure and you have an outside pressure.

And you have an internal pressure, right? Let's assume that the outside pressure exceeds the inside pressure.

We're falling off that cliff. And. We have vascular collapse over here.

In the non collapse state. The pressure over here might be P not.

Plus epsilon. And the pressure down here might be peanut minus epsilon because there's resistive drop.

So in the middle here the pie might be equal to peanut.

And peanut minus p naught is zero. So you might actually collapse.

And over here. Right. At that point.

There's no flow going through that system. What is the pressure over here?

It's the upstream pressure, right? It's no longer P naught plus epsilon.

All of a sudden, if that is collapsed right. You have a hydrostatic problem.

And the pressure over here becomes P upstream.

When this becomes upstream, the transmission pressure here becomes positive.

Right. Then the transfer pressure over here becomes positive and you're pushing this open.

You're pushing this collapsed region open. There's flow going through.

When you have flow, you have resistive drops. All of a sudden that pressure over here is no longer p up, but it becomes p zero plus epsilon.

P0 minus epsilon p0. Over here you've got collapse again.

So in very large Elastic Tube experiments, you can actually see this flutter phenomenon, right, where a tube can go into these kinds of oscillations.

And even though the outside pressure is larger than the inside pressure.

The collapse is not one of static collapse. It's actually a state of what we call flow limitation, meaning that there's still flow going through,

but that flow is no longer dependent on the upstream pressure minus the downstream pressure.

It's actually the upstream pressure minus the outside pressure.

And that's what happens over here the moment that you reach essentially zero transmission pressure.

The flow going through the system becomes independent of the downstream pressure.

It's sometimes called the vascular waterfall, right?

The flow that's going over a waterfall is independent of how far it's dropping.

Right. Only dependent on what the upstream pressure is, right?

We have the same phenomena in the in the ureter. We have the same phenomenon.

We probably haven't talked about this. It's flow limitation in the respiratory system.

When you do fev1 measurements, forced exhalation forced exhaled volume at one second because part of the respiratory system also.

Collapsible tubes. And when you actually do a fourth exhalation,

your intra thoracic pressure becomes very high and much higher than the alveolar or the the the tracheal pressure.

So you can actually have collapse there as well. Point here is.

And you've all tried this. Flow through collapsible tube.

Right. You've all probably try to to, uh, increase the volumetric flow rate through a collapsible straw of a smoothie.

Right. And by generating more negative pressure through buccal action.

Right. You're trying to suck harder and harder does not make more smoothie come through.

It's simply because at some point, the straw that you're using is actually going into a state of collapse.

Try that the next time you go to Toscanini's. Right.

So you can do an experiment there. And that's exactly what we have over here.

This is what I've pretty much described over here. You have an upstream pressure.

You have a downstream pressure and you have an external pressure, right.

Once the transplant pressure reaches zero, you're getting in a state of flow limitation,

and the flow rate going through the system becomes independent.

Of. The downstream pressure only dependent of the upstream pressure, minus the external pressure or outside pressure.

But that. Ladies and gentlemen, now. Is our input output relationship that we sought for the peripheral circulation or independent variables.

Our dependent variable is Q. And now if I ask you how does this change if I double the blood volume.

You see, you don't understand at this point because of your deep reflection of the material.

How powerful a method you have just learned. Right.

Because if I ask you, how does this how does a volume change?

How does a volumetric flow rate, how does Q change if you double the descending volume?

Right. If I had asked you this at the beginning of the lecture, maybe next year. I should start off with that.

How does the flow rate through the peripheral circulation change if you double the volume to the standing volume?

Right now you know exactly that. The only place where the descending volume enters is the mean systemic pressure.

If I double the mean systemic pressure, I double the mean. If I double the descending volume, I double the mean systemic pressure to 16mm of mercury.

No change in resistance, no change in compliance. We think of these things.

And let me emphasize this. We think of these parameters as independent.

The resistance is independent of the filling state. Not quite true.

The compliance is independent of the filling state. Also not quite true, right?

But we think of RC and volumes as independent variable variables.

So if I ask you how does it change.

How does Q change or the, the uh, flow through the peripheral circulation through a doubling of the descending volume?

It goes like this, right? You double PMS only place where the descending volume appears.

The slope of this is independent of the volume. The slope is not going to change, right?

Doubles goes up up up up up up up until it reaches zero, until you reach zero more pressure and boom, it stays constant.

Because once you reach zero transfer pressure, the flow through the system is in a flow limited state,

it becomes independent of the downstream pressure. Do the same with RA and do the same with RB.

So we have achieved our goal. Of getting that input output relationship.

This is the input output relationship, either graphically or algebraically, of the peripheral circulation.

One final, as I say, right? That's it. Does it have anything to do with reality?

Of course not. No, it does actually. It's actually fairly powerful, as I said.

Otherwise we wouldn't be teaching it. Right. So this here.

Is changes in resistance, and by resistance we mostly mean the arterial resistance.

So this is what the model predicts, right? If you change the arterial resistance PMS does not change.

Resistance does not enter the equation.

The definition of the mean systemic pressure. Right.

But the slope changes. This is normal.

Two times normal. One half normal. And as you might have heard of Arthur Guyton, one of system theory,

physiologists of the last century has done a lot of, uh, dog experiments for that matter.

Here he created a fistula, meaning a short circuit between a large artery and a large vein.

Right. And when that happens, when you actually open that fistula.

When that happens, you have very low peripheral resistance because you are short circuiting.

Let's say you have a large you have a big bore connection between the femoral artery and ephemeral vein.

Right. You're bypassing all the micro circulation of the leg.

Flow takes the path of least resistance. By then, if you have a big bore connection, you're opening that fistula.

Meaning that the resistance drops significantly. Right.

No change in the mean systemic pressure.

Likewise, if we change PMS over here, right, by giving a blood transfusion.

We move the offset. But we don't change the slope.

All again, think of these as independent again. We are.

We ask Doctor Guyton to do the experiments for us and.

Forget about the epinephrine over here. This is just to control the system in the same state.

But what you can see over here is that the slope stays more or less the same, but you're just changing the mean systemic pressure.

Right. You're changing. Sorry. You're changing the view.

Manipulating the volume. Not with the transfusion, but by making the veins actually constrict or relax.

Right. That's why we have the connection over here. Sorry. But essentially, it's the same if you're manipulating the descending volume.

Right. So all of this essentially the same.

Uh, blood volume again. So this is the one that I was thinking about here with manipulating blood volume.

Right. And again, the dog is blood 126.

Um, sorry. You know, but, uh, blood 126 is, uh, infused 200 cc's.

The slope changes a little bit, right? Because it's very difficult in experiments to really keep some of these, um, parameters independent.

Right. But the bigger effect is that we actually have a very significant change in mean systemic pressure.

So we asked you. Patient comes into the emergency department of taking care of them.

There is the hemorrhage. 500 cc's. Right. What's the effect on the peripheral circulation?

It's a change in mean systemic pressure. It's a reduction in mean systemic pressure.

Right now you're giving 1000ml okay. I'm changing the mean systemic pressure in the other direction right.

This little formula and this graphical representation allows you to go through that

mental exercise and to figure out how does the peripheral circulation respond to,

um, to these kinds of perturbations to the system.

Now, let me ask you. How does the flow through the peripheral circulation change if we double the heart rate?

Not a single iota. As a heart rate is a parameter of the heart lung pumping unit.

There's nothing in our formulation over here that relates to cardiac contractility,

in systolic compliance of the heart and diastolic compliance with heart rate, pulmonary capacitance, pulling resistance, and so on.

We're only looking at the. Flow through the peripheral circulation only depends on parameters of the peripheral circulation.

Now in the intact circulation. Next Tuesday, those two will interact, right.

And then we will figure out how does the new steady state actually change.

And that steady state is determined by the interaction of both the heart lung pumping unit and the peripheral circulation.

Okay, it was one question. It is the PMS PMS.

Is it mean systemic pressure? Okay. All right.

We are time. There's one more thing that I will start with.

And this is what is called the Wind Castle approximation. I'll start with this at the beginning of next lecture.

But apart from that next lecture we will switch the focus and we will look at at the single isolated ventricle.

And we'll come up with a description of the pumping action of the ventricle.

And as I said and then on on on Tuesday next week we'll put it all together and look at the function of the intact circulation.

And you all remember that Tuesday next week we'll meet at room.

Road building for 370. Okay. Okay. Yeah.

Okay. All right. Thank you. And please, make sure that you take everything that you brought in.

Okay. I'm going.

