[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
And then we have the topic of supraventricular tachycardia.

No, no AFib today I think unless we go really fast, if we go really fast, we could end up probably not.

Yeah. All right.

Great to see everybody again.

We're sort of going to just back up and review a little of this stuff that we talked about at the end of the session on Monday or Tuesday,

Tuesday whenever I was here before. So here's that nice little video.

When we do the super ventricular tachycardia. We're going to look at this a little bit more um with the heart doing different stuff.

Can you guys hear me okay. This thing catching me. Yeah. Okay. So if you guys remember, here's the superior vena cava.

Right atrium left atrium. We have the sinus node sends a signal goes through the right atrium.

We hit the AV node. We're just for a moment nothing happens.

Then we go down to the hits bundle and the two bundle branches.

The right bundle branch, the left bundle branch, which sends the signals down to the apex and up to the base of the heart.

We've been talking a little bit about bradycardia.

So when the sinus node is too slow we get sinus bradycardia.

When the sinus node is too fast we get sinus tachycardia.

We talked a little bit about what happens when it takes too long for the signals to get from the upper to the lower chamber of the heart.

So when the A.V. node is too slow, or when one of the, um,

any of the disease of the bundle branches is so severe that the that not all the impulses get from the upper to the lower chamber of the heart.

And we also talked a little bit about what happens when one of the bundle branches doesn't conduct.

So we were sort of putting this in the context of having a system eventually for looking at the EKGs.

Right. We talked about rate rhythm, axis intervals, chamber enlargement and chamber hypertrophy.

And so what have we done so far? We talked a little bit last time about how to figure out what the rate is.

Ventricular in atrial rates. We've talked about some of the rhythm.

And obviously all the talks that I'm giving you are all about the rhythm piece.

So there's different things that we'll find in terms of the rhythm.

But so far we talked about sinus rhythm. We talked about first, second and third degree AV block.

We're going to talk about supraventricular tachycardia today.

We talked about axis. We talked about bundle branch blocks.

We are going to talk today about the measurement intervals.

And then we're going to talk about chamber enlargement today to sort of round all that stuff out.

So you have all the pieces of the. Puzzle.

So this is going to be a little bit of review. We saw this slide last time sort of towards the end of the session.

So this little cartoon just to orient you again is like that first picture I showed you with the movie, but with a heart kind of removed.

This is just the conduction system. So this is the atrium.

There's the sinus node, there's the AV node and there's the right bundle branch.

Here's the left left bundle branch with the and the posterior farcical here in the anterior farcical here.

Um, in this diagram V1 is just about here.

So what we should be thinking about that way.

So when we have when we're thinking about vesicular block, it means that one or the other of these things gets blocked.

But the right bundle still conducts normally. So when we have both fascicles working we have normal ventricular activation.

So right this these arrows are just referring to this part.

You go down the post your farcical down the ante your farcical.

And the net vector for activation is kind of in this direction, which puts us in that normal part of the axis wheel that we were talking about before.

When we get the anterior bicycle blocked.

So just one thing like we talked about before, there are a couple of things where there are multiple names for the exact same thing.

Some people will call it left anterior hemi block. Some people will call it left.

And here for six block exactly the same thing.

So when this is blocked it's either called la AFB or it's called la HB if it's hemi block.

But those are exactly the same condition. So if this is blocked, then what happens?

The conduction proceeds down the posterior. Farcical.

And then it has to go through the myocardium to make up for the fact that this is blocked.

So you see that the net vector for cardiac activation is moved in the left axis deviation direction.

The opposite happens when you go posterior hemi block.

So here the posterior farcical is blocked.

The right bundle still conducts normally the left and to your farcical still conducts normally.

And we have to go through the myocardium, not through the normal system,

to get through to the part of the heart that would normally be activated by the posterior.

Farcical. And that results in the axis being shifted rightward.

So we looked at this EKG, too, right towards the end of the, uh, session.

So this is just an example of identifying right axis deviation.

So I just want you to look mostly at the limb leads here.

And one of the ways that we can figure out that there's right axis deviation.

One of the first things I kind of quickly look at is look at lead one.

The main component of lead one in the QRS complex is negative.

So what does that mean? It means the main part of cardiac activation is happening.

So where's lead one. It's here. If it's mainly negative, it means that the main part of the activation is happening in this half of the circle.

Right. So that already, you know it's kind of. Probably in this right axis deviation, uh, direction.

The other thing that we can look at is we can look at what we call the isoelectric lead.

Now, the isoelectric lead can be a lead where there's absolutely no signal at all.

Or it could be a lead where there's an equal amount of up going and down going component to the QRS.

And in this case, lead two and lead AVF each have that kind of a feeling like three is a little bit more negative.

F is a little bit more positive, but it's pretty equal given what we've got to look at.

So we know. So where is lead two and where is it lead.

AVF two is pointing this way and AVF is pointing this way.

So we know that the activation is going to be kind of perpendicular to these guys.

Right. And we already knew that the axis is in this half of the circle.

So where does that put us. It puts us kind of in this. So that puts you right axis deviation.

Does that make sense to everybody? So this is another example.

So in this case we've got AVL which is completely negative.

So where is AVL here now?

AVL has a little bit that could be more in the normal.

But most of it is in the right axis kind of area right.

And what do we see also that lead three is positive.

And ABF is also positive. Lead three and AVF are both markedly positive and maybe three is a little bit bigger than AVF.

So that would put us more in this part than in this part, right?

If this one's a little bit bigger, it's a little closer to the right axis deviation.

Now if we wanted to decide that this is posterior vesicular block because we see right axis deviation,

what the other things that we look for is that the QRS interval is a little bit prolonged.

So now the upper limit of normal for the QRS interval is 120 milliseconds, which is three tiny boxes.

And this is a little prolonged, but it is not over 120 boxes.

So it's usually like 100 milliseconds, maybe 110 milliseconds for post your vesicular block and you'll see a right axis deviation.

So if you see those two things together, you can say and you don't have any other explanation for the patient to have right axis deviation,

then you would say this is most likely a left posterior for circular block.

And this is the opposite. So leads three and F instead of being positive like before.

Let's go back see how these guys are super positive.

The opposite happens when you have left axis deviation, when you have left axis deviation.

They're super negative down here right. Um.

So here you see that AVL is positive completely positive.

Lead one is completely positive. Leads three and AVF are two completely negative.

So the axis is between. 60, -60 and -90, which puts you sort of in that left axis deviation.

The QRS, again is slightly prolonged but not fully abnormal, not greater than 120 milliseconds.

If there's not some other explanation for that to happen, then we say that this is likely left anterior for secular block.

And after you've seen a bunch of these, you sort of get that pattern in your head.

You see this, you're like, oh, it's negative in all of these leaves.

Probably it's going to be left axis deviation. Probably it's going to be potentially left into your for secular block.

When you see that these leads are super positive like this, you're like, oh that looks like it's probably right axis deviation.

And then you just look at the rest of the ECG to confirm your suspicion.

Okay. So now we're going to talk about intervals. We sort of started talking about that a little bit when we were talking about the QRS width.

So here is our P. She's and t wave, right.

The measurements that we usually make that are important for the egg are the PR interval, which goes from the start of the p wave.

To the showers. And that's wherever the showers starts in that we've.

So, um, this will be the PR interval. So it encompasses all of atrial activation.

And that every node activation that happens in between.

The QRS complex is everything from the end of the PR interval, the start of the QRS complex all the way to the end of the QRS complex.

That sounds easy, but sometimes the bundle branch blocks and stuff,

it can be hard to see where the end of the QRS really is, but try to be as as good as you can.

So each of these is 40 milliseconds, so a typical QRS interval would be less than 120 which is one, two three boxes.

Then there's the acute interval, which starts also at the end of the PR interval.

Starts right there. And then it goes all the way through the T wave, the repolarization to the end of the tea wave.

And that's another thing that's a little bit difficult to measure sometimes,

because sometimes the tea wave can slope down very quickly, but we try to look at it in multiple leads and get a good measurement.

So here's just sort of a summary of the normal things.

Now, I'd say the ones that are highlighted here are the ones you should know.

Nobody knows the rest of these numbers there. They're available in textbooks and things like that.

But the most important thing. Is the PR interval, which goes from 120 to 200 milliseconds.

So we had talked a little bit before when we were talking about the A.V. blocks,

that when we identify somebody with first degree Abbey block, it's somebody whose PR interval is more than 200 million.

Right. So the upper limit of normal of the PR interval is 200 milliseconds.

And it's measured from here to here. Right. The QRS complex 80 to 120 is the normal range.

It's hard to know what it means if it's too short, honestly. But that's the normal range.

They give you 80 to to to 120 and then the acute interval.

Is 420 from here to here. And that has an asterisk because we'll talk a little bit later.

When we talk about ventricular arrhythmias. The recovery interval of the heart is very dependent on the heart rate.

So we have formulas to normalize it for the heart rate.

So to give you like one number that is the right number to measure it against is probably a mistake.

So we do a lot of of of correction of the interval.

So we'll measure the interval. But then we'll measure the heart rate.

And there are some formulas that you can use to correct the interval for the heart rate.

Oh. There's this. We have the formula here. So this is the formula for correcting the.

This is the most commonly used, uh, formula. So this is sort of just a summary of all those things I just said.

So the PR interval gives you the atrioventricular time delay.

Right. The short duration gives you a ventricular depolarization.

And the short interval includes both the ventricular depolarization and repolarization.

You could ask why don't you have a measure that's just repolarization?

That would be so good. Because what?

That's what you really want to know when you're measuring those different things you want to know is the repolarization normal or abnormal?

That's why we measure the interval.

There is something called the G8 interval that tries to measure the very end of the QRS to the very end of the T wave.

And it relates a little bit to that thing that I mentioned, that it's a little bit hard sometimes to see exactly where the end of the QRS is,

and it's a little bit hard to see exactly where the end of the T wave is.

And if you make that j t measurement, it has a little bit of fuzz on either end of the measurement.

So it's actually a bit more reproducible if you take it from the beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the T wave.

The problem arises when the Q, R, s is not normal, and you have a bunch of the interval that's actually taken up by an abnormal QRS interval.

You could get an abnormal q t interval when the reporter's ation is actually normal.

That makes sense. So there are some problems with some of these measurements because they're difficult to make.

So we're going to move on. If there are any questions about any of that before we move on to the next section.

Yeah. Right.

So the first segment, which is this segment here is really important from a morphology standpoint,

like what it looks like, whether it's elevated from the baseline, whether it's depressed from the baseline.

There's some people that have certain diseases that make that segment look really abnormal.

Um, but the actual measurement of it is not something that's clinically.

Yeah. Anything else. Okay.

So the next thing we're going to talk about is chamber enlargement.

And so what you'll note what you'll notice as we talk about the atria as being enlarged.

And we talk about the ventricles as being hypertrophy.

And that's mainly because when the atria are subjected to like stress hemodynamic stresses, they tend to behave more like a balloon.

They get kind of bigger, but they get bigger and thinner as they as they, you know, get stressed.

Whereas the ventricle, when it gets stressed, at least early on, it can get the walls of the heart can get thicker.

It can also get dilated and sort of blow up, not so much like a balloon, but get dilated.

But, um, the main thing that we're looking at in young,

healthy people in particular who's who are getting EKG is, is whether we have evidence of hypertrophy.

We can make diagnoses of a lot of conditions based on that.

So let's think about the atria.

This is a little small down here. But this if we think about our big moving picture, where are the atria relative to our leads that we're looking at.

The right atrium is kind of here.

But my left atrium is just a little higher and just a little and of course more leftward, but also more posterior than, than the right one.

And so, um, the p waves, of course, we know, reflect the atrial activation because the sinus node is on the right side.

The right atrium depolarize this before the left atrium.

So the initial part of the p wave is going to reflect the right atrial activation.

The the latter part is going to more reflect the left atrial activation.

Um. That the the inferior leads in particularly lead to and sometimes V1 can be the most, um uh, useful leads to look for the different activation.

What's shown here is what you'd expect to see in the lead too.

So that's the guy that's going this way. And so if you imagine the sinus node is up here getting activated this way.

Right. The P waves in normal sinus rhythm coming from the sinus node should inscribe a positive deflection in lead two.

And the first little part is the right atrium. The second little part is the left atrium.

When it's a normal p-wave with normal like velocity through the atrium of the conduction through the atrium, you get just one bump.

For the p-wave. However, when the right atrium becomes very, very big, its component is additive to the left atrial activation too,

because it not only gives you more, um, myocardium getting activated, but it takes longer to activate when it's larger.

So it kind of dwarfs the left atrial activation unless the left atrium is abnormal as well.

So what you see is this tall p wave. And what what do I mean by tall I mean greater than 2.5mm on the surface.

Now there's a sort of name for this. We sometimes call it a people monopoly.

And the reason we call it a people monopoly is when people get lung disease, they a pulmonary hypertension, for example.

The right side of the heart is pumping against that heavy pressure.

The right atrium tends to enlarge and you end up with a people.

So it's maybe a good it's a good name because it helps you to remember the pathophysiology for how it's happening as well.

So when the left atrium is enlarged the opposite kind of happens.

The right atrium is still activated first right.

But the left atrial activation sort of dwarfs the end of the p wave as it would be before.

So it gives the p wave this notch appearance. And in addition, like just like with the right atrium,

this takes much longer to occur when the left atrium is enlarged because the conduction velocity is a little bit slower.

So you end up with this bumpy p wave.

This is called a p mitral and it is 2.5mm wide.

This is easy to remember because it's 2.5mm either way.

The reason this is called a p mitral is this dates back to when people used to get rheumatic heart disease.

Not that uncommon. And one of the side effects of, uh, of rheumatic heart disease is you can get stenosis of the mitral valve.

And when you get stenosis of the mitral valve, your left atrium becomes giant because it's trying to contract against this very tightly closed valve.

And so your left atrium becomes really big, and you end up getting a p mitral that looks like that.

Yeah. Yeah, you can see it in lead three.

Lead two is probably the easiest one to look at, just because it's the vector that's most contiguous with the sinus node activation.

That's the only reason. But you could actually interpret it in any of the sort of leads that look at the right side.

Um, the measurements are validated for lead to. So now let's talk about v1.

So v1 remember is on the front right by the sternum.

Right. Again we said left my left atrium up here.

My right atrium is kind of down here. And so when you have normal atrial activation you have initially activation that's heading toward V1.

And then you're having activation that's away from V1. So you end up with this kind of look to your normal p-wave morphology.

Pretty balanced. The up and the down part are pretty balanced.

When you have right atrial enlargement, it becomes bigger, but it also becomes wider.

And you end up with this sort of smaller, shorter left atrial component so that this is fully one millimeter.

This is right atrial enlargement in V1. If you have left atrial enlargement the opposite happens.

You then have activation toward the V1 electrode that's relatively short compared to the left atrium.

And then you see very long a negative component to the left atrial activation.

So you'll see those both of those things together in the same EKG.

So just to summarize, the two people mainly tall, skinny.

Fat tall component in V1. The P.

My trolley. Left atrial enlargement. 2.5mm across.

It's like a little m. Easy to remember my trolley, I think.

And then that V one has that big negative term. There.

So what do you think of these p waves? Does someone want to try giving that?

Interpretation. Here's lead two over here.

And here. The V1 is over here. What's that?

Someone just said something. Yes. Perfect, perfect.

So we look at lead two and look at this little sign. It's just like in the little cartoon, right.

These are usually pretty pretty good if you especially if one side of the heart is normal and the other one's abnormal,

there are a lot where both atria are abnormal. And then it can mess things up a little bit.

But this one you see a really nice sign there.

And then you see in the p-wave in V1 you see a slight upward up going component but a big down going component.

So it looks like pretty clear left atrial enlargement. So let's talk about the ventricles now.

And the big thing that happens when you have left ventricular hypertrophy is

that the left ventricular component to the QRS complex is much more right.

So we start with our septal depolarization left to right RV and LV depolarize at the same time.

But because the LV is thicker, it contributes more to the activation.

So you end up with left axis deviation, and you also end up with more voltage on the EKG itself.

So there are two things that you can measure in V1.

You can add the S wave in V1 to the AR wave in v6.

And if it's greater than 35mm, that's um, that correlates with an ultrasound of the heart measuring a thickened heart chamber.

Yeah. So that says that here. So you add the down part the S wave AV1 and the up part of the R wave in v five or V6, whichever is greater.

If the sum is 35mm or more then there is left ventricular hypertrophy.

There's another criterion that's very simple, but maybe not quite as highly correlated as this one.

But this one looks at just lead AVL.

And if the QRS complex is 11mm or more in lead AVL, which is that left sided vector,

then there's that also correlates with left ventricular hypertrophy.

So this is an EKG from a 24 year old man with shortness of breath and fainting.

And it turns out that he has something called hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, where the left ventricle gets very, very thick.

It even blocked its own outflow tract a little bit.

So classically, these folks, when they try to exercise, they lose their, um, forward ejection output from their heart and they can pass out.

And this looks very classic for that. He doesn't have the AVL sign over here partly because he goes by ventricular hypertrophy.

But if we look at the other uh index you can look at V1.

And what do we have here 510 15mm right.

Here. We got the S wave here. Right? 20, 25, 30, 35, 42.

Right. So that meets criteria for ventricular hypertrophy.

So you see this kid that passes out in the emergency department.

You see a lot of 24 year olds that have passed out in a lot of different circumstances.

This is when you do not let them go away without an echocardiogram to diagnose their heart disease.

Does that make sense? Yeah, maybe.

Some of them are so in truly pediatric, uh, EKGs.

It's a completely different. Um, so these are all all of the EKG things I tell you are for people age 18 and above.

Um, if you're under 18, then there's some other things that you want to do.

Your wave progression could be different. Some of your expected intervals might be shorter.

They're PR intervals can be really shorter. Um, so things that are only slightly prolonged for an adult would be abnormal for a child.

Yeah, I called the 24 year old a kid, but he's not a pediatric.

So right ventricular hypertrophy then is the opposite, where again we have the same sequence of activation.

The LV and the RV are being depolarized simultaneously.

But because the RV is thickened it opposes the LV more.

So there's more component toward V1.

So it often makes you grow more of an AR wave much earlier.

Remember we talked about that clockwise and counterclockwise rotation.

This is an example of something that will make the AR wave progression really early.

And sometimes you have a big tall AR wave even reversed our wave progression from V1 out to V6 if the RV is very large.

So normally for most of the QRS complex, the RV is overshadowed by the LV, so RV can be difficult to diagnose.

But two criteria have to be satisfied. One is that there's right axis deviation the axis greater than 100 degrees and the r is greater than S in V1.

What is that mean? Are greater than s in v1. It means normally the R is smaller than that, the r being greater than the S just.

There's a tall hour wave in view, right?

Are greater than the S in V1, or the S is greater than the R in v6, which is just the opposite of that, right?

The s. Is greater than the R. So instead of it being like that, you were small and then big down here.

But they're each exactly the opposite of one another. So here's another person in their early 20s with shortness of breath and fainting.

So what do we see? A couple of things we see, right. What did I say if we look at Leeds one and AVL.

And they're mainly negative. That usually means that there's right axis deviation.

Right? So lead one. It goes across here.

If it's mainly negative, it means we're sitting here, right?

And the determining the determining factor of whether we're in this quadrant or this quadrant is how tall the our waves are in the inferior leads.

So in these leads, if they're very positive, that puts us down here.

In the right access deviation category. Then let's talk a little bit about the RF progression.

What do you notice. Really positive to start with in V1, right.

So those are our two criteria for our VCE of skinny tall our wave in V1.

This is not right. Bundle branch block. There are no bunny ears. The QRS duration is normal right.

So here we have tall our wave and it almost it's not quite reversed our wave progression because this still gets bigger from here to here.

But the combination of this with this means that there's marked our VH.

And so what does she have. She has pulmonic stenosis.

So what is that. That's a congenital disease. When you're born with your pulmonary valve really tight,

it makes the whole right ventricle become really thick because it's working against this closed valve since birth.

Right. So that's they have really, really thick right ventricle.

What do you guys think of this EKG? I can tell you the history of is a real person.

So I met this lady after she was supposed to get a breast biopsy.

Someone had found a mass in her breast. She.

They went to go biopsy it, and they made the incision. And she had an arrhythmia that they had to shock her out of.

So they got stopped doing the biopsy and they called us for help. So what do you think about this EKG?

So let's start from the beginning. What's the rate? Somebody want to say?

Or easily say, is it? What is it? Sinus tachycardia.

Sinus rhythm. Sinus bradycardia. Rate of cardiac sinus.

Bradycardia. Okay. Rate. And the rhythm is sinus.

We just said sinus bradycardia. There's a p wave with each QRS.

Right. The P waves are positive in two. They're positive.

They're positive negative in V1. So those look like they're normal right.

They don't have that P my trolley or the pulmonary. So I'm thinking her atria are normal.

Her PR interval. What do you think?

I call it upper limit of normal. Maybe. Right. Maybe not. Maybe right at 200 milliseconds.

And then what else? What looks a little different on this EKG compared to the other ones I've shown you in terms of the intervals?

There's cute prolongation. So what did we say? Approximately for the cute interval for 20 milliseconds.

246. 600 and.

That's really abnormal. So it turned out that she has a disease, a genetic disease called long cut Type two.

Her family has it as well. She had a sister who had a cardiac arrest when she was bulimic as a teenager,

and it was ascribed to the bulimia, which probably did give her some electrolyte disturbance.

But the thing that made her have the cardiac arrest. Let's go on to.

And so when you see this and you look at that and they're like,

she just had a cardiac arrest for me when I tried to do her breast biopsy, said, oh, well, she needs some genetic testing.

Right. So this is an example of the rhythm you can get when your interval is too long.

We'll talk about this a little bit more when we talk about ventricular arrhythmias.

But basically the repolarization can be so long sometimes that the next p wave doesn't even conduct.

This looks like 2 to 1 heart block, which it technically is, I guess.

But the reason it's not conducting is because the repolarization is so long, the next beat is not ready to conduct to the ventricle.

So this isn't actually any kind of conduction disease. It's, uh, it's the how long the CT is in this case.

And then what can also start to happen is the acute can be so long that you start to initiate early after depolarization,

as they're called, which are spontaneously generated new action potentials.

Because the the you're not returning to that baseline, um, of the resting potential of the cells.

But we'll talk about that more when we get to the ventricular arrhythmias.

But that's why we care about beauty prolongation. All right, who wants to do this one?

This will review some of the things that we talked about before.

On Tuesday as well. So we'll do the rate first.

Is it sinus bradycardia. Sinus rhythm or sinus tachycardia.

Yeah. Sinus rhythm. Right? It looks like it's not tachycardic.

If it was three boxes, it would be over 100, right?

And if and it's if it's five boxes, it's within it's 60 and it's below that, then we'd be bradycardia towards sinus rhythm.

Our p waves are upright and lead to. Let's see.

We look at v1. I think that I could convince you that they're still biphasic.

So kind of normal looking, right. Not not too terrible.

They're. The PR interval.

What do we think? They're normal. Right? Pretty normal.

Okay. What about the shoes? It's widened.

Yeah. So more than 120. So if the QRS is widened, what does that make us think of?

A bundle branch block. Right. So a bundle branch block. So we're like okay that QRS is wide.

Is there a bundle branch block. And what are our choices.

Left or right. So which is this? The one that's down going right.

This is the left bundle branch block right. So this is the one where we go down.

Remember the right ventricle is the front ventricle. The left ventricle is the back ventricle.

So when the left bundle is blocked we go down the right and away for most of the late activation.

Right. So that makes you be negative in V1.

So note usually left bundle branch block QRS greater than 120 negative in V1.

This QRS complex. And then in V6 we go look over here.

And we should have that monotonic R wave. This is the left bundle branch block.

How about this one? 12345.

Sinus rhythm. Sinus bradycardia. Sinus tachycardia. Yep.

Sinus rhythm. Right? Okay, good. Do we like our P waves?

What do we think about the P waves? It's a little borderline, but I think you could call it here.

There on each of the beats.

So I think there's a little noise here, which always makes it a little hard to interpret, but I think that there's for real.

A little bump there. What would you call that? The P my trolley.

Left atrial enlargement. Right. So there's sign of a little bit of left atrial enlargement.

What do you think about the PR interval? Maybe a little long.

A little more than one big box. Just a little bit more. So I would say there is some sign of first degree off, right?

And then what do you think about the QR? Complex.

Why it again, right. So when you. So some people will say oh well it doesn't look wide here right.

But it looks wide here. Which one counts. The widest one.

Because the only reason it's not wide here is whatever cardiac activation we're looking at here

is isoelectric during some of this activation because this is all ventricular activation.

So the widest one is the one. So.

What do we think about this. So it's wide. We think is there a bundle branch block.

Right. Which one is this. Is this right bundle branch block.

Right. So bunny ears right right right bundle branch block is the bunny ears.

And remember the right when we have right.

But the right bundle branch block, the right bundle is blocked. The left ventricular activation is completely normal.

So like the most lateral part of the left ventricle actually looks kind of normal.

So that's where V6 is the five and six. So it doesn't look perfectly normal because you see these little things from late activation.

But this it looks the most normal out at B6 even though it's really wide over here.

Right? Yeah. Yeah, the PMI trial.

So it's maybe a little subtle on this one. But see how there's like two bumps to the P wave there.

Bump bump. Bump bump bump bump bump.

There you see it. And lead to all three of them kind of look like that.

So that's the one that looks like, um, the idea is that it looks like.

Yeah. This one. Is that fair?

Yeah. Okay. And you can also see in V1 on that same one.

It's always dangerous that I go back to the right one. Yeah.

That the down going component to me looks a little bit more prominent.

It's a little hard to see there. I can if you told me you didn't believe me, I would be okay with that.

But there's a little bit of noise. Probably the patient has a tremor or something.

But so, you know, a lot of things about this person, you know, they have, right?

Bundle, branch block, you know, that they have a little bit of their disease of both the at the AV node level at the right bundle level.

And we know that they have some problem with their left.

Atrium. So there are a lot of diseases that go with that. Yeah.

Oh, sorry. Wait. It's actually the it's the QRS duration.

So if you have a full left bundle branch block, you should be more than one 20 milliseconds.

If you have a physics block, it should be sort of in that 110 to 120 kind of range or 100 to 120 kind of range.

So just a little bit inside it has that look of being a little bit abnormal, a little wider than a normal EKG but not fully wide like this.

And the left bundles, you can see them be like 150 milliseconds, 170 more seconds.

And people who have cardiomyopathy, they can get really, really wide, but they still have the same morphology.

Okay. Oh, right. Oh, and who who just asked that question?

You get to read this one. Because this is what you were just talking about.

So this one. What do we have? We have sinus bradycardia.

Right. There's some things on this EKG that we're not going to read because there's some coronary issues.

But, um, what do you notice? You know, we were talking about the patterns for the hemi blocks.

So the QRS duration here, you can't see all the boxes, but it's not a full 120 like it doesn't look like the other one.

Right? Scoop this one. See how the QRS here is so wide?

One two, three boxes easily fits in there. This one looks a bit more narrow.

It looks a bit more normal out at B6, right?

Um, but it is a little wider than typical.

So it's this is that kind of block kind of territory.

So is this anterior or posterior for circular block. It's the one that makes all the QRS is negative.

It gives you left axis deviation. The left axis deviation goes with anterior fasciculus block right x axis deviation goes with.

So this is answer for secular block. For later when you do coronaries.

She's also got a giant anterior infarction.

All right. So this is kind of my break before the SVG start.

Should I start the SVD section or should we. Yeah.

Okay. Sounds good, sounds good. All right, so for your heart rate, you all remember you can count the boxes between the beats.

You can remember 301 5175 6050.

I still do that. Sometimes when I look at rhythm strips, you know,

someone hands me a rhythm strip and I'll count it out that same way to remember what the heart rate is, determine the rhythm.

Look, is there a wave before each or each QRS?

Is the rhythm regular or irregular? So does every P wave have a cross?

And in what's the relationship? If they don't determine the QRS axis, you can determine the quadrant just from looking at leads one and AVF.

If they're both positive, you know that quickly that you're in the normal quadrant, right?

Then you can determine the isoelectric lead and look for the QRS access to be perpendicular to that isoelectric lead.

Determine the intervals. Look for your PR interval, your shows duration.

If the cure duration is greater than 120 milliseconds, that means there's a bundle branch block, right?

If there are bunny ears or for prime, then it's right bundle branch block.

If it's QS which means it's completely down going in v1, then it's a left bundle branch block.

And we talked about the cut interval as well.

If there is left axis deviation consider that it's left anterior or hemi block.

Left bundle branch block also can have it. Left ventricular hypertrophy can have it.

If right axis deviation consider left posterior hemi block right bundle branch block right ventricular hypertrophy.

Look for atrial enlargement so tall P waves P pull Manali means right atrial enlargement.

Wide notched P waves in lead to mean left atrial enlargement.

The P is biphasic in V1 and the larger one wins.

The first part is the right atrial part. The second part is the left atrial part.

Then next you look for ventricular hypertrophy. So lv h we add the s wave the down going part in v1 to the R wave the up going part in v5 or v6.

If it's over 35mm then there's lv h. Or if just the voltage in lead AVL is over 11mm.

You also have LV h. And don't worry about this part.

Yeah. So that's kind of a summary of where we've been so far.

Okay. I think we should take a break because we're going to jump into SVT in the next section.

That's. Cool.

All right, so we're back. So we're going to move on to talking about super ventricular tachycardia for the next section.

So these are going to be fast rhythms coming from atrial tissue.

So the definition supraventricular means above the ventricles tachycardia fast heart rhythm.

Any tachycardia utilizing the atrial tissue or the AV nodal tissue for its initiation and perpetuation is an SVT.

It's what we'll call it. So it's a it's a bucket of many many different types of arrhythmias.

And we're going to look at examples of uh, almost all of them today.

Uh, we're going to keep atrial fibrillation for another day because it's the most common probably, and has a lot of other things along with it.

So, uh, the difference when you look at, uh, super ventricular tachycardia,

probably the first thing you might want to do is check to see if it's regular or if it's irregular.

The majority, as you can see here, are regular. Um, and there's a bunch of different ones here.

So this all seems like word salad. Hopefully by the end of the talk it will not seem like that so much.

Do you guys still have this book that has.

It's the Lilly textbook. Yeah. So this is from the Lilly textbook.

And what I would say is this it gives you a really good framework for looking at the different arrhythmias.

The one thing I would say is these rates that they put here are big generalizations.

For the most part, I don't think I've ever diagnosed anyone's SVT necessarily, except for maybe atrial flutter on the basis of their heart rate.

Um, so I wouldn't say like just because this one is 120, that it's not one of these, that it's or it's that kind of thing.

So the only thing caveat I would give you is that. But they've basically got it divided up pretty just like I had it on the other slide,

um, regular rhythm on one side, irregular rhythm on the other side.

And we'll talk about the different diagnoses. So we already talked about atrial premature beats APIs or premature atrial contractions.

Right. These are not technically tachycardia.

But these extra beats can be what start up people's tachycardia.

So it's important to be able to identify them. So usually the p wave comes in early and the p wave morphology is different.

So what do I mean by that. Here take a look at these beats.

At first there's these there's these beats that come in early.

One two right. This one I'm not sure the p wave looks that different.

Just what she's talking about that the P wave is different. But if we look at it up here.

Right. Look at that. Relative to that, do you believe me?

That's different than the others, right? This one also, it's sort of tall and skinny compared to that.

And so what we can tell from this strip is the patient has frequent premature atrial contractions.

Um, and they're all coming from pretty much the same place, right.

That these are the one that this one looks a lot like that one.

Right. The premature beat may come so early that it is not conductive.

So this is an example of that. We're in sinus rhythm. Then there's this early premature beat.

And just like we were talking about before, it can block to the ventricle.

This doesn't necessarily mean that there's conduction system disease of any kind,

but the fact that this is early and this p wave looks different than all the other P waves here, suggests that that's an ectopic beat.

It's an extra atrial contraction. It's just come so early that this conduction system isn't ready.

And that's not indicative of any kind of conduction system. So this is where we're going next.

So this is super ventricular tachycardia. So here's the patient.

In real life when I met this patient they were doing this first.

And then we got this later. But this is what they look like when they're not in tachycardia.

So what do we see here. We see that they're in sinus rhythm.

Right. We see that their axis is in the normal kind of range.

Their PR interval is in the normal range.

The QRS looks pretty normal. Not like wildly abnormal.

Maybe the left atrium. Tiny bit enlarged. It's down going here, but it looks pretty normal there.

So maybe it doesn't totally meet criteria for an atrial abnormality.

That interval looks normal. So this is pretty much would probably pass as a normal ECG.

Let's look at this one. What do we see? The big difference is the heart rate, right?

Can somebody tell me what the heart rate is? Just shout it out.

Yeah, like one close to 150, maybe two big boxes, right?

Close to 150. So faster than normal.

We aren't usually just like sitting in a chair going 150 beats per minute.

Do you see a p wave in front of each of the q R races?

Not really right. You could maybe, like, hallucinate some little stuff over here, but it's not super consistent.

And over here, I definitely don't see anything, that's for sure.

A p wave, right? The one thing, though, that I would say is if we compare the shoes here.

To the QRS here in V1, it looks a little different, right?

There's a little bump right here.

The other thing I would say is if we look at the shoes here and compare it to the shoes here, there's also like a little bump there at the end.

So that's what's important for this particular super ventricular tachycardia.

The reason that that's important this is what we call a node reentry tachycardia.

So this is from a circuit that forms within the AV node.

And some of the tissue right next to the AV node.

It makes a circuit in the center of the heart. And it sends impulses up to the atrium and down to the ventricles.

I think I have a movie. So this is what we're talking about.

So this is a. People say that it's a circuit in the AV node itself.

It's not really. It's. Does everybody know what an isotropic conduction is?

It means that a tissue has a different conduction properties in different directions.

So like in one direction it might be very fast. But if you go in a perpendicular direction the conduction could be very slow through the.

So the tissue here near this little vein, which is called the coronary sinus.

The tissue here has a lot of anisotropic conduction.

And that's part of what sets up this circuit.

But you basically have a circuit that's going around and around using the AV node and what we call the Perry nodal tissue.

Uh, through an area called the triangle of Coke, which isn't that important unless you're trying to zap it with a catheter.

But then the, the, the, uh, ventricles and the atrium get kind of activated simultaneously.

Importantly, nobody's listening to the natural pacemaker.

If you look at the sinus node. What's it doing this whole time?

Doing nothing because it's going too fast for it to reset itself.

It can't control the rhythm, and we're off to the races because this little circuit won't stop.

So what is that little bump that we were seeing on the EKG?

We look for this little sign of the P waves right after the QRS.

Like just barely after the QRS. Sometimes this is even a little bit long for what we usually see.

It's more like that other one we were looking at. And what is that? It's an upside down P wave inscribed on the QRS complex.

So if you imagine the P wave in your mind, flip it over and put it right on top of the QRS.

That's what you start to see. So, like, if I go back here.

And we imagine this p wave. Flipped over and put right on top of the shoes.

There would be like a little bit. Afterwards.

Same deal. Here, take this p wave, flip it over and smash it on.

So these are retrograde P waves that we're seeing there. So this is probably the most common regular SVT that we see.

Um, it's probably if you look at adults, it's at least 50 to 60% of patients who present with a regular narrow complex tachycardia.

When I say narrow complex. I mean the QRS is less than one 20 milliseconds.

Um, it's most often seen in people with structurally normal hearts.

The range for the heart rate can be very variable, but between 120 and 150 beats per minute.

We see more women with it than men. The age of onset is typically like 30s to 40s is the first episode, but some people get it younger.

Um, dual AV nodal physiology is where it comes from.

And we'll show you in a minute what that means. The EKG, what we look for is what they call a pseudo r prime in V1.

So what does that mean? When we were looking at v1. There's that extra little bump from the retrograde p wave.

This is the pseudo r prime. Now why is it called a pseudo r prime.

Like when we were looking at right bundle branch block, we saw bunny ears as part of the QRS.

And we called that an r s r prime. That was all part of ventricular activation.

This is atrial activation superimposed on ventricular activation.

So this little bump, even though it appears right at the terminal part of the QRS, is not from ventricular activation.

So it is called a pseudo R prime. It's we didn't see it in sinus rhythm.

And we know that this is the p wave here. And the same thing here.

You see this S wave. But it's not really an S wave.

It's from the p wave peaking out at the end of the QRS complex.

Does that make sense. So those are the two things that it says on that slide that we're looking at.

The other thing when we're looking at narrow complex tachycardia is we divide them by the RPE interval.

So what is the RPE interval. So before we were talking about the PR interval to decide if people have a first degree AP block or not.

Right. So the PR interval is from like the beginning of the p-wave to the SRE right.

For this tachycardia we can't measure that because the QRS happens first.

So here we look at the QRS to the start of the wave, which we can't even really see the very start of the P wave, but it's very short.

So the way we classify these species as short RPE tachycardia versus a long RPE tachycardia with a long hour tachycardia,

you can see a p-wave sticking out there closer to the other QRS that's coming.

Afterwards we'll see some of the other ones. But this is an important concept when we're grouping sweets together.

So that's what this means.

If it says the RRP is much less than the PR, so the RRP is really close to the shares that you're looking at just after the shoes.

And we may not even see a PWA at all. There's sometimes when you look at it and you're just like, I don't see any P wave at all.

It could be the P wave finished during the QRS complex, and you just don't see that at all.

The you can terminate the arrhythmia. So if anyone doesn't mind saying is there anybody here that's ever had SVT?

No. We had somebody last year that did that was willing. Tell us about it a little bit.

There are maneuvers.

So the AV node conduction is susceptible to things that change of the tachycardia is susceptible to things that change the AV nodal conduction time.

So one thing that you can do for people who have SVT episodes,

they often if they've had it when they were a kid, they often figure out that they can stop it.

Like you see people with some of the other arrhythmias.

We're going to talk about where they really come on in childhood, and the kids will sort of drop to the ground and go like this,

and then they'll stand back up and they'll be happy because they won't be in tachycardia anymore.

And they figure it out really early on in their life that they if they bear down with their stomach for a few seconds, they can make it stop.

And so what they're doing is triggering a vagal reflex to increase their AV node conduction time and terminate their tachycardia.

So a lot of people that have had their SVT for a long time will say, oh, you know,

if I cough or if I really bear down with my stomach, then I can I can make it stop.

And so that's helpful for the patient. But it's also helpful for me because it means that I know that the AV node is part of the circuit,

that they're, that they have that they're using to, to stop their arrhythmia.

Yeah. Yeah.

Oh, I hate those. Oh, people that are just.

Yes. On a monitor.

Yes, yes. No consequence. Right.

So the good news about SVT in general is it's not a lethal condition.

It's a annoying condition. It can cause palpitations.

It can be distracting. It can sometimes make you lightheaded.

Um, and but it's not something that could make you die suddenly.

We'll talk about other things a little bit that that we might worry about that kind of thing a bit more.

So as an everybody's seen this, you can see how it's activated.

So the whole idea when we look at textbooks, you see these two pathways in the AP node drawn like this,

like a fast pathway and a slow pathway in the AP. And that's sort of the pathophysiology for the reentry circuit.

The interesting thing about these pathways is they're not so physically separate.

They're electrically separate. Like you can separate them out when you do stimulation of the heart,

but they're more of this anisotropic property of some of that peri nodal tissue that really produces the two different pathways.

We're going to talk about something in just a moment where the pathways are two physically different structures.

This is sort of anisotropic properties of most of the same parts of the.

But for the way they think about it, this is very helpful anyway.

So the idea is the atria are up here.

The ventricles are down here. This is all in V node.

So in the AV node we have two different pathways.

And as many as 30% of people have had two pathways within their.

And the idea is there is one that's relatively fast that you use all the time for most of your activities.

But if there's an extra beat that comes, it blocks relatively early.

So most of the time you're the activation wants to proceed down both of them.

It starts it goes down the fast pathway. It starts to go down the slope because the fast pathway beats the slow pathway.

It's blocked most. So that's the sort of normal state when everybody's walking around doing their own thing.

When you get an extra beat a see what happens?

The fast pathway blocks and it allows conduction down the slow pathway.

Okay. And you can see that happen. What the evidence of that is.

You see a p p wave that comes early and the PR interval gets much longer on that

subsequent beat that shows that you've sort of switched over to the slow pathway.

And then what can happen is if the slow pathway is so slow that this guy that blocked ready to recover conduction when the.

By the time this guy comes around to the bottom, then you get stuck doing this where this guy comes around, this guy's ready.

When this guy comes around, this guy is ready and. In the tachycardia.

So this is a trend tachycardia. And then the conduction goes up to the atrium down to the ventricles after that.

So that's basically how event happens.

Sort of looked at that. This is just a zoo. I'll go ahead. Yes.

Yes, it absolutely is. So all of us have atrial extra atrial beats, extra ventricular beats even on occasion at a very low level.

And they go by and we don't notice them.

You know we they don't do anything.

But for these people there's a particular coupling interval of their pack that um, that uh will trigger the reentry circuit.

And it's because it's that coupling interval that blocks their fast pathway.

Pathway. What's very interesting is when we take people to the EP lab to do a corrective procedure for this,

what we do is we ablate the slow pathway and we leave them with the fast pathway.

We don't do anything about that pack because we can't really like we can't do it.

We don't know when it happens. The weird thing is that the person with SVT remembers that pack because their whole life,

that coupled pack has started the SVT before, and so they'll complain.

They'll come back to the office after the procedure and they're like, I keep feeling like it's gonna start, but then it doesn't start.

And I'm like, that's good news.

But they're feeling that extra beat because their body has become conditioned to the extra beat that used to start their SVT.

And eventually they learned to. Are it just like we ignore all our other extra bits that.

So that's typical of unity. We talked about this.

This is the our prime. Everyone saw that. We talked about that already.

Okay. So this is the next one. So that was what we were going to do about Avi node reentry.

This is the next one on the list which is every.

So to someone want to tell me the heart rate here? Yeah.

Also 150. Very similar to the other one, right. What looks different here?

What do you see? Waves here. Yeah, you can see them, right?

Would you believe that over the p wave if I told you upside down. P-wave right there.

These guys. So is the r p bigger or is the p r bigger?

The PR is bigger. So this is still what we call a short RPE tachycardia.

So the P wave is closer to the QRS. But it's not as close as it was for avian.

So what is this? This is this is a tachycardia where it's using an extra pathway outside of the AVR node to produce the tachycardia.

This is something called AVR. So it's going to show it here.

So this is a person that was born with an extra connection between the upper chambers of the heart and the lower chamber.

So normally, I don't know if you remember when we talked about this on Tuesday.

The AV valves are totally fibrous structures.

They don't permit any electrical impulses to go from the atrium to the ventricles.

And the only way down is the AV node.

And I said this thing that the AV node, its job is to protect the ventricles from too many signals in the atrium.

Right. So some people are born with somewhere along the Ave valves.

Actually, the most common spot is not where they drew it here in the figure.

It's actually over here is the most common spot. So it can be around the mitral annulus.

It can be around the tricuspid annulus.

But what it is is basically a little slip of muscle that connects the atrium and the ventricles,

um, in a place that's outside of the natural conduction system.

And the one thing that that pathway does that,

that or doesn't do that the Evernote does is it does not slow the impulses at all when you go through there.

So you can go through there pretty fast for. So what do you see happens in this case?

Usually it's a PVC that initiates it, but sometimes it can be a pack.

So the idea is do I have rhythm representation here?

I don't. Okay? Keep. So what happens when you're in tachycardia instead of going around and around here, you're going down the his Purkinje system.

You activate the ventricles and it goes up the accessory pathway.

And because it takes a little bit of time to do that,

that's why the activation of the atrium is relatively later compared to even when you were basically getting simultaneous.

Activation of. Right. So this is initiation of HIV, RTV reciprocating tachycardia.

It's called. So what's associated with this.

Let's see. We'll talk about this. So this is the second most common form of of SVT because it's something that you're born with.

You very often have it for much longer of your life. Sometimes when you're a kid, certainly when you're a teenager.

So it's not like the other tachycardia we talked about, where you're more often an adult.

What's interesting about the one we talked about before AV node reentry and tachycardia,

you almost need a certain amount of physical space in the heart to start to have it.

So it's very unusual to see AV node reentrant tachycardia,

the first one in pediatric patients who have normal hearts because it's the heart is not even big enough to support it.

Uh, so this this ave ave reentrant tachycardia or ave, reciprocating tachycardia, they're both the same, uh, rhythm.

They have a younger age of onset than the AV nt case.

It can occur in patients with structurally normal hearts.

But there are also some people with congenital heart disease with particular types of abnormalities, particularly of the, um, right side of the heart.

So there's a disease that I've mentioned there called Epstein's anomaly, where the tricuspid valve does not form normally.

It's displaced down into the ventricle, and they can have multiple accessory pathways over the tricuspid valve.

The majority of these pathways are, uh, are sporadic.

We say that they don't have a genetic component, but there's a small group of cases that are inherited.

There's a particular disease, uh, that was covered here in Boston.

So I have to mention that this particular gene that PRK, a G2 gene, which is a, um, uh,

disease where there is glycogen storage problems and they can develop these pre excitation patterns that can even develop over time.

Um, there's a male to female predominance for this one you recall.

The other one was a bit more common in women. Um, this is sort of the classic person with this is like a 17 year old boy,

whereas the other one is more a four year old, 40 year old woman would be kind of the typical person.

So this requires the presence of that accessory pathway.

So that extra connection between the upper and the lower chamber of the heart.

And they can those those fibers can occur in slightly different ways depending on the size and location of the fiber.

Probably the two important things to know about is one is that the majority of them are what we call silent.

Like, you can't say they're normal. Your EKG is normal in sinus rhythm.

We don't see them. And that's usually happens when the connection is relatively small.

But the other one. That's that's the second most common is probably this Wolf Parkinson White, which is a bi directional, uh, accessory pathway.

So that means that there's a connection between the atrium and the ventricles, and you can see it in sinus rhythm because the, um,

impulse that starts at the sinus node, it goes through the atrium, it engages the accessory pathway and it engages the AV node at the same time.

And it's a race between the two. The moment the pathway starts depolarizing stuff, it creates a slurred, uh, complex on the surface, eg.

And that's called a delta wave. And that's what's diagnostic of the Wolfe Parkinson white syndrome.

Now, this bothered me a lot when I learned about cardiology.

First I was like, wait a minute. So what happens with the concealed people?

They have this connection and it doesn't conduct in the anterior direction.

It only conducts in the retrograde direction. A wire doesn't know which way it's being activated.

Why does that happen? Does anybody have any thoughts on why that might be the case?

I sort of alluded to it a little bit a sentence or two ago.

It has a little bit to do with the robustness of the connection, because there's a source sync problem between the atrium and the ventricle.

The ventricle is a very large structure. In order for you to depolarize enough ventricular tissue to cause real and to grade ventricular activation,

you actually need to depolarize a significant wave front of cells going forward.

So if your connection is relatively small, you're going to try to re depolarize a little bit of the ventricle.

But it won't propagate into the whole chamber because it's too small of an activation wave.

It'll just die out. And you'll never see it on the EKG.

But it turns out going the other way. You don't need very big a connection to pre excite the atrium retrograde.

So we call that a source sink difference. So it's much easier to have retrograde conduction through one of those pathways than it is to have an.

The reason we care about that is if you have a robust pathway that causes integrated conduction, you can potentially die from it.

If your upper chamber starts going really fast, you have integrated conduction through the accessory pathway.

You no longer have your AV node protecting you from fast rhythms from the upper chamber of the heart.

You can get very rapid activation of the lower chamber of the heart, and that can be lethal.

It can cause sudden death. So those we always try to get rid of whenever we can, especially if they're the kind that are dangerous.

Yeah. Yeah.

So what happens is actually it's almost as if I took a catheter and stuck it in your heart and paced you really fast.

So it turns out when you go into atrial fibrillation.

So people with these pathways are prone to going into atrial fibrillation.

That's an irregular rhythm where the upper chambers of the heart can go like 400 beats a minute or more.

And if I put a catheter in your lower chamber of the heart and paste you at 400 beats a minute, probably half of you would go into ventricular.

And so it's the heart is normal,

but the abnormal electrical activation allows the ventricle to be activated so fast that it can cause you to go into ventricular fibrillation.

And that's what causes the problem. Yeah. So there are some that are aren't great.

Only those are very rare. So there's wolf Parkinson. White ones go both directions.

Um, to have it go only forward is I don't know if that's a little bit beyond the scope of this class, but when you are a fetus.

You have two Avi nodes. And you have a little muscular sling, like when you're, like, really in development, you know?

Uh, there are some people where that.

So there's all there can be an entire conduction system over here, like a mini AV node,

a mini like his Purkinje system, and they meet together in this little sling.

Uh, in between. Part of normal development is that one of those in volutes, and you're left with your main one.

To the extent that people with congenital heart disease who have a hole here are left only with that one, you know.

But the diminutive version of this that is sometimes left behind.

Can create this thing that is like a mini.

His Purkinje system. It's called a Mannheim fiber.

Uh, and that is very difficult to activate in the retrograde direction because it's poorly coupled to the atrium.

It's not technically just a little fiber of muscle there.

The story goes that the guy that discovered that they used to go back in the day,

like in the early 80s, used to go to go for open heart surgery for these.

And the surgeons would cut out these pathways instead of the stabbing them with catheters like we do now.

And he cut out that pathway, them behind. Fiber.

And his wife, who is a pathologist, called him up and said, dude, you just cut out the AV node.

I don't know what you're doing up there. And he's like, oh, I cut it out of here, though.

It wasn't out of here. So that's kind of how they figured out that it looks like.

So this is just to summarize what we were kind of talking about these accessory pathways.

So this is a little, um, cartoon, a lot like the one we were looking at for the AV node reentry and tachycardia,

where we have a sinus node, we have the atrium, we have the AV node, we have the ventricles.

And then over here is the accessory pathway. So what happens in sinus rhythm with every heartbeat you have sinus node activation.

And it's a race between the AV node and the accessory pathway.

Invariably the accessory pathway if it has integrated conduction allows part of the ventricles to get depolarized.

And then it fuzes with the activation of. System.

So what it looks like in sinus rhythm is this, which is the p-wave.

You don't have that time where nothing is happening anymore. It goes right into the p wave there.

You see a slurred onset, which is that delta wave, and then you see the rest of the surface QRS kind of superimposed on that.

When you go into tachycardia.

Initially with the example they showed in that figure, was that the tachycardia that the pathway blocks with an extra beat.

You go down the AV node that allows the pathway to recover and you go around like this.

So the two things that happen between here and here is the delta wave goes away.

Right. Because now it's being used for this instead of for this right here the delta wave goes away.

This is normal activation going down. But you see this retrograde activation of the P wave.

That comes a little bit after the QRS. Like that.

Now there's another rhythm that can happen. It can go the other way.

There's no reason that you can't go down the accessory pathway and up the A.V. node.

So this one is called ortho dramatic atrioventricular tachycardia.

Ortho dramatic is named for the direction down the A.V. node.

So when you're integrated down the AV node it is what we call ortho dramatic.

When it goes up. Retrograde through the A.V. node, it is called anti.

So that's all named for the direction that it's going through the avenues.

So in this case, the QRS is narrow and normal because we're going through the AV node and the Purkinje system in an integrated fashion,

totally like normal activation. So the QRS should look like normal activation.

And the P waves should be retrograde and a little bit away from the QRS.

However, when you do like this, right?

What happens? It's. The QZ is all determined by this.

Which is all activation outside of the historic.

It's all coming from, right? Wherever that pathway inserts into the ventricle.

So it's all bizarre wide myocardial conduction until it plugs into the his Purkinje

system down at the apex and comes back up the his system to get to the apex.

So that's what you see. And what does that do. It makes the QRS super wide very very wide rhythm with 1 to 1 retrograde P waves like that.

Does that all make sense? It's a lot. Yeah. Yeah.

It's so there's a couple of things.

Like in order for this to happen, it has to be a very robust pathway, like for it to support that type of of circuit.

So this is probably the least common rhythm we see when there's a pathway there.

The see what sets these up is basically whatever kind of extra beat that you have.

If you have a lower chamber beat, maybe it might be more likely to initiate this tachycardia.

If you have an upper chamber beat, maybe it would be more likely to initiate this, uh, tachycardia.

Um, that's that's sort of the best I could do if if they can go both ways.

Sometimes it really is a toss up. It could go one direction on one episode, even in the same person the same day.

It could go one direction and it could go the other direction as well.

But both of these have the A.V. node as part of it.

So they still those kids that have this, they can stop their arrhythmia with those vagal maneuvers.

Sorry, there was a question. Yeah.

Yes. Oh, I see what you mean.

So it can be different. So the axis of the.

So. Right. So you're asking in this case does the p wave look different than what we see in, um, avian art.

Is that what you're saying? Right?

Right. Well the overall vector of activation of the p wave.

In this case it's like that. And in this case it's like that.

So they're usually still going low to high because it's still going from the valve annulus up towards the sinus node region.

So it's in lead to it's usually still negative.

You're absolutely true though, that some very smart old cardiologists can tell you where the pathway is by looking at the P waves retrograde.

That's probably not something we need to figure out right now,

but you can tell that if you really look carefully at the axis of the P wave, if it's well enough seen,

but they are usually still negative and lead to just because of that direction, even if it's in the center going up,

or if it's in the lateral wall going up, it's still kind of heading towards the direction of the sinus node.

You might. You might. That's one of the things that those people look at.

Yeah. No, that's really great. Yeah. Because you can.

If so, supposing it was a left atrial, uh, accessory pathway and you're doing this, you could see it be negative coming out that way,

but it would still probably be negative and lead to because it's still heading up, you know,

towards that because the valve annually from from the vantage point of the atrium.

Right. Your valves are on the bottom. So it's always going to be going from the annulus up.

So lead two is always probably going to be negative.

But you can definitely tell from the axis where the pathway is as long as you can see all the P waves.

But that's that's really a lot more than I was going to talk about today with these.

Yeah. Any other questions? So this is a case that, um, that I saw at MIT when we were fellows.

Um, this wasn't his first EKG, but it was after all the things resolved.

This is what is EKG looks like. So does somebody want to say some stuff about this EKG?

What do you see? It's a little hard because you don't have all the boxes.

So is it, uh, sinus rhythm?

Is it sinus bradycardia. Is it sinus tachycardia. Sinus rhythm.

Yeah. So these are the boxes one, two, three.

I think it's slower than 100. Yeah but is it sinus.

Is there a p wave in front of each QRS? So this is the tricky thing, right?

So what you do is you look for p waves, you know, uh, Peter, your check over at MGA,

you should always say share Shayla pay which is like look for the P waves.

And so the P waves what I, what I, the place I usually look is lead to.

And it's a little hard to see them. They're not very big right.

Here. I'm not sure I see them. So is it sinus rhythm?

I don't know. But then if I look v1, I think I see something.

And then if I look at the rest of the pre cordial leads, I see a p followed by a q rs, right.

Then if I go back here, I think this is probably a p wave.

But it's really hard to see. Why is it hard so hard to see.

Because it's smooshed in with the QRS complex, right?

It's really smushed in. So what do we see is happening here?

This is a patient with Wolf Parkinson. Wife. They have pre excitation from a delta wave.

Here's the p wave. Here's the slurred QRS.

And here's the normal activation on top.

Does everybody see that?

Sometimes you have to look at the leads where the p-wave is a little bit separated from the QRS because it's so close to the QRS.

And here they're sort of really smushed in with each other like here.

I think the P wave is even taken up by some of the beginning part of the delta wave there.

And so it just makes it hard to see. So try to find the leads where it looks like you can tell the best what's going on.

Yeah. Yeah.

This gets to what? We were just talking about the pervs. It has to do with where the pathways.

So you can also do some maneuvers with the CG to figure out where the pathway is.

So do you remember the causes under the causes of left axis deviation?

One of them, one of the causes was Wolf Parkinson white.

So if you have in this case it's a poster a septal pathway.

Uh, it's the way you figure it out is that V1 and V2 look at two different sides of the septum of the heart of the ventricular septum.

So the polarity of the delta wave is negative in V1 and it's positive in V2.

So when it switches polarity you know it's between there. So that's why I say septal.

And then if it's negative heading away we know it's kind of at the bottom most part of the valve.

And so poster septal.

And this is really important because to the uninitiated when you learn about coronary disease this can look like it's a young kid,

but that they've had a big heart attack before. But it's not a heart attack.

It's all the old pathway that they have from when they were a kid.

So this is Wolf Parkinson White. We call this anterograde pre excitation.

And what that just means is that there's a delta wave there.

We see that there's some, um excitation of the ventricles coming from outside of the natural.

Christ. Doing this in sinus rhythm is not bad.

What do we worry about when we have Wolf Parkinson White and we have atrial fibrillation?

This is what I was mentioning before. So atrial fibrillation the atrium can go very fast very irregular.

Up to 400 beats a minute.

The mere presence of the pathway, for reasons we don't totally understand, predisposes these young people to atrial fibrillation.

When we talk about atrial fibrillation later on, you'll see it's normally a disease of older people.

But there's something about having that pathway there.

You see the folks show up with atrial fibrillation more than their age matched control group because the pathway conduction is non detrimental.

What does that mean. So the AV node that slowing that we see from the atrium to the ventricle is called detrimental behavior.

When I give an extra beat to the AV node it actually prolongs its conduction time.

That does not happen with myocardial tissue. It does not happen with the accessory pathway.

So it is non detrimental. It keeps going just as fast no matter how fast I give it input.

Uh, from the atrium. The ventricular response can be extremely fast in atrial fibrillation, leading to the risk of ventricular fibrillation,

which is an irregular rhythm from the lower chamber of the heart that can cause sudden death.

The main way to cure that is to shock the heart back to normal.

So these patients have an increased risk of sudden death. And how do we know who's at risk?

We look in atrial fibrillation at the RR intervals that are pre excited, that are wide, that are through the pathway.

We'll look at this in just a moment. If that's shorter than two 30 milliseconds how do we figure out two 30 milliseconds.

A quick and dirty is one big box. Plus one little box is 240 milliseconds.

So we can kind of tell if they're shorter than 230 if they have multiple accessory pathways.

So those Epstein's anomaly patients that I mentioned, they definitely fall in this category.

If the emergency department has given them certain types of AV nodal blocking agents.

So imagine we're in atrial fibrillation, the atria going for 400 beats per minute.

We have two routes to get to the ventricle. We have the unsafe accessory pathway route.

We have the safe LV node route. And our colleagues at the emergency department give a medication that blocks the safe route.

What do we get? More unsafe conduction, right.

So that you don't want to do when you're in atrial fibrillation.

When we do an ablation procedure to eliminate the conduction from the accessory pathway that returns their risk of atrial fibrillation.

Sudden death to a normal general population risk.

So it's very, very important to identify these patients.

So this is our friend from the emergency department. This is what he looked like when he came in.

So the hallmark of atrial fibrillation is irregularly irregular conduction.

So we look up here. Is it irregular. Yes.

Is it irregularly irregular? What does that mean, exactly?

Irregularly irregular means like. It's not a repeating pattern.

It's not like it's fast, slow, fast, slow in a way that I can predict.

I can't tell you, looking at this beat exactly when that beat.

Regular. What do we see here? That there are a couple of beads that are wide and they're really close together?

These are right around one big box pushed one little box apart.

And the faster they go, the wider they are.

So that's also indicative of conduction occurring down that accessory pathway.

So this is what excited atrial fibrillation looks like.

This is what that means is that the person is in atrial fibrillation.

And all the beats look like they're coming from the accessory pathway.

You'll sometimes see people where there's a mixture of beats coming from the accessory pathway and coming from the normal conduction system.

There's one beat on this whole strip that's coming from the normal conduction system.

That's this one. Do you see the last one? There.

It's nice and narrow. That's what his heart should look like if he didn't have the.

Right. So when you look at that, it makes you nervous.

You want to make sure to get him out of this rhythm. And then afterwards you want to try to get rid of that pathway as soon as you can.

So here's just an example of that disease, Epstein's anomaly, because I think it's nice for you guys to see what it looks like.

So here's what the normal heart looks like. You have two atria two ventricles.

And in this case they made a mistake with the tricuspid valve.

The tricuspid valve is displaced way down into the right ventricle.

There's almost you can almost see where it wanted to be before.

It usually makes the right atrium really big.

The right ventricle really small. And there's very abnormal signals around this tricuspid valve.

And these there are often multiple accessory pathways all around there.

So let's take a moment just to talk about catheter ablation.

So what do we do when we want to stop these pathways. So that's kind of what I do.

Most days that I'm not here. Um, so we take catheters that are basically an electrode attached to a long wire bunch of insulation.

We put tubes in the femoral veins, usually.

So on both sides will usually put some measurement catheters where we can measure electrical activity from the heart.

Um, and then there's an ablation catheter that delivers radiofrequency energy.

Um, it sits, you know, in the blood pool. We usually model that as a saline pool.

And then there's myocardial tissue that has a certain impedance.

And then they have a grounding patch, which is usually a big dispersive patch.

That's. By or on their flank.

Um, and we can basically deliver what's called unipolar ablation.

It's not really unipolar, but. It's basically across that whole circuit that has, um,

a direct heating and then a conductive heating component that can basically cauterize the tissue.

So this is what the room looks like when we're working. We have a couple of different things that we can look at.

That's myself and one of our fellows from a few years ago.

We have X-ray equipment that can show us where the catheters are in the heart.

Um, this person has also a valve ring. That's a valve on the x ray there.

Um, we we have a bunch of catheters in the heart where we can measure signals.

We can. These are from the EKG that are. It's on the body surface of the patient.

There's also blood pressure monitoring here for this particular patient.

We have some mapping systems that allow us to create a three dimensional geometry of the area that we're mapping.

And so we can between the x ray and intra cardiac echocardiography, we can see different parts of the heart that we're working.

And direct our ablation efforts. So what do we do when we have late?

Wolf. Parkinson. White. We put catheters up.

So this is this view of the heart is what we call the left anterior oblique.

So in that view left heart structures are over here.

Right. Heart structures are over here. Do you remember I said that the most common location for the accessory pathways is way over on the.

So there's this vein called the coronary sinus that starts from the vein inside.

It's that little hole that when we were we were looking at the activation.

Let me show you. This is the coronary sinus.

And it goes into the board and wraps around the mitral annulus like that.

So the nice thing about having it there is it gives us a free look at all of the electrical activation that happens around the mitral annulus.

We then bring another catheter up. We have some measurement catheters that are over here the right atrium,

a catheter that can measure signals from the hist bundle which is located there.

And then this catheter is put through a long sheath.

Can you see there's a little there's a tube that's just a little bit bigger than this catheter that's placed by a trans septal puncture.

So we puncture through. Do you guys know what the fossa oval is like?

There's that thin spot between the two upper chambers of the heart.

And that's how we do a lot of interventional cardiology procedures is by doing a trans septal puncture.

It's called we bring this tube over to the left atrium and we put an ablation catheter through it.

The coronary sinus electrodes help us to see exactly where the accessory pathway is.

And we put our catheter on it and deliver the ablation energy to get rid of that pathway.

So here's an example of that. So it's a little bit hard to understand this, but this is basically EKG leads here.

These are all different EKG leads. This is.

Measuring right at the annulus in the coronary sinus.

So when you have. So the S's are pacing from the atrium.

So we're bringing the just the heart rate up to a stable rate, which helps a lot for the ablation.

What's happening here is this is a delta wave.

This is the showers here. And we're mostly seeing delta wave activation here.

Here we see atrial activation and ventricular activation right together,

because that's what happens if you have an accessory pathway and you're right in that little corner.

We're right here. And we look at this electrode here.

It'll show that atrium and the ventricle right together.

If we're at the accessory. Because that's where they're connected.

So here's the slurring onset of the QRS.

Here we do the zapping. And immediately what do we see a normal QRS after that.

And do you see how this is the ventricular activation. It immediately hops out.

And this looks more like a normal across.

So the delta wave is gone and you have normal activation after cauterizing the accessory pathway.

A little hard to understand that picture, but if you look at these, these are all simultaneous like that.

Are you guys able to see that? And then the patient's EKG after that should be normal.

This is radio frequency. Yeah.

So they say that if you, um. If you really do a good job localizing the pathway, you should only have to zap it maybe 1 or 2 times.

And the time for zapping is about 10s.

So the actual zapping is very, very short relative to the mapping.

Probably the whole procedure from beginning to end is probably about three hours.

And that's because we. You know, the patient has to be sedated.

We put the catheters in. We have to put stuff up to map, make sure that everything is stable, see what the different arrhythmias are,

confirm that the diagnosis is what we want, and then we map into the 3D geometry space.

We put the catheter on there, do the ablation.

Then we have to wait and make sure we really got it, that it's really gone, and do some testing afterwards and then take everything out.

And again it is nearly and if you're in the right place, it really should be instantaneous.

It is cured. Yeah, yeah, it's a very appealing disease because of that.

Yeah. Yeah.

So there's risks to any procedure.

So when I see those patients in the office say before we do the procedure, we have to sit down and talk a lot about different risks.

So there's a lot of stuff. So there's always a chance when we put tubes in the blood, vessels in the legs that we could, especially for small kids.

Right. You can damage a blood vessel there.

We use a special vascular ultrasound that allows us to see the blood vessel and put our needles in under direct visualization.

Now, which is a big difference since when I first started doing this 20 years ago, it's a really huge advance.

When we pass the catheters up into the heart, particularly when we do that trans septal puncture,

there's a chance that a needle or a wire could poke outside the heart and cause bleeding into the sac around the heart, the pericardium.

If that happens, we sometimes have to drain it out. Or there's even a tiny risk that a person could need open heart surgery.

If there's a really big perforation, that happens.

The big thing that's happened to make that safer is we put an ultrasound, there's an intra cardiac ultrasound that we put up there,

and we can actually now also watch our trans septal as it happens,

which has made it extremely like it's reduced the complication from that dramatically.

The other thing is when we're on the left side of the heart, that's kind of the business side of the heart.

Everything from the left side of the heart goes right out to the body.

So if there are any clots that formed on anything, if they were to break off, they could cause a heart attack or a stroke.

We use a special recipe for blood thinning with a medicine called heparin that prevents blood clots from sticking to the catheters.

And also the catheters are treated with heparin like substances to prevent the blood from sticking to them.

They also have an irrigation system that prevents that.

That helps to, like, wash the surface of the catheters to prevent clots from sticking there.

But those are probably the biggest risks. Every now and then, some of these pathways could be in a dangerous location,

either near a coronary artery or near some of the natural conduction systems.

So we could go in there and study them and say, oh, you know, it's dangerous, but the risk of a bleeding, it is more serious than we thought.

And with oftentimes talk with the patient or with their parents to decide how we're going to proceed if it turns out to be one of those things.

So it's definitely the procedure on your heart.

So it's not like nothing to do it, but it's it's definitely something that can change people's life afterwards.

Any other questions? Well, we move on. Okay.

So the next one is a little bit more mundane. This is a tachycardia right.

How fast is this one. Also 150.

They're all about like heart rate. So this one, what do we see?

Is it a short RPO or a long our p tachycardia.

Here are the P waves right. So this is along our tachycardia.

The our wave is here. That P-wave is here. Right. Yeah. Long our tachycardia.

The other two we looked at before. We're short our tachycardia and it's positive and lead to kind of looks like sinus because it is.

Yeah. So this is sinus tachycardia. Um it has a heart rate greater than 100 regular p-wave.

Looks like sinus rhythm positive and lead to positive and one um.

And, you know, it could be totally normal to have sinus tachycardia if I tell you guys to run up and down the hallway and come back and I do your EKG.

Most of you will have sinus tachycardia at that time. That can be totally physiologic.

But there are diseases where you can have automatic tachycardia from the sinus node.

You can also have autonomic diseases like a lot of people that got long Covid got

inappropriate uh sinus tachycardia afterwards where they'd just be sitting there.

You do their EKG, they're in sinus rhythm. But it was way too fast.

And I feel kind of terrible. Um, so the the causes of inappropriate sinus tachycardia, autonomic dysregulation,

and there's some inherited diseases that also contribute to autonomic dysregulation.

The other thing, though, like when we're in the hospital looking at a person that has sinus tachycardia,

there's some really obvious things you would think.

But you have to think about what could be happening. Like if a patient is hypoxic, if their lungs aren't working well because they have pneumonia,

or they have a clot in their lungs or something like that, they're going to be tachycardic.

They're going to have sinus tachycardia if they're hypovolemic.

If I had a dollar for every surgical service that is called me saying my patient's tachycardic and I ask, are they bleeding?

They're like, oh yeah. And so it's hypokalemia can definitely cause that.

And that can be from bleeding. It can be from dehydration for a lot of other reasons.

Fever, anxiety, pain. Just do you guys know what the thyroid is?

It's a gland in your neck. And the hormone from it helps to regulate your metabolic status.

So if you have a condition where your thyroid gland is overactive, you can you can get sinus tachycardia.

And that exercise can be physiologic. There is also an extremely rare disease.

I think I've only seen it once. It's in every textbook on SVT, but I think I've only seen it once in my entire life.

Sinus node reentrant tachycardia, where the idea is even the sinus node has like a pure sinus node area and Perry nodal tissue around it.

And you could get theoretically like a little reentry circuit right in the sinus node.

And the idea is you could actually see people in normal sinus rhythm and they hop up to 150 and sinus rhythm, and then they hop down.

And that's what's different between them in like the inappropriate sinus tech people who are just always high.

Um, so that's these are harder to treat when like this autonomic dysregulation.

I don't know that we know enough about the autonomic nervous system to actually.

Know exactly what's wrong with, say, the Long-covid people and know how to exactly treat it.

So we try to treat the symptoms, but we're not treating the root cause.

So like in complete contrast to the Woolf Parkinson white, where we know where the problem is, we can put our finger on it and zap it.

This is exactly the opposite, where we don't necessarily know exactly how to do, how to address the causes.

So how about this one? Short or long.

Our tachycardia. Long r p tachycardia, right?

R p. It's not like the first two that we looked at where the p wave was like right after the shows.

The P is like a little ways out and the p r interval looks like it's kind of maybe in the normal range.

Right. So there are a lot of different things that can cause this O.

And the other thing is that is the p wave looking like sinus rhythm or not.

So what did we say? High to low and lead to would make it positive and lead to.

Is it positive and lead to. No it's negative.

Right. So it's some kind of rhythm. Maybe not quite as fast as the other ones we've looked at.

Maybe this is like 130 beats a minute. The P waves are 1 to 1, right?

We see one P wave for every QRS, but the P waves don't look like they're coming from the sinus node, right?

So this is something called atrial tachycardia. So there are a lot of different parts of the atrium that can develop automaticity.

Remember we saw there was that um the Krista terminals all up and down the right atrium,

that all the cells along the crista terminus can develop automaticity, especially when there's scarring of the atrium.

If there's something causing fibrosis or stress in the upper chambers of the heart.

If on the left side, near the pulmonary vein, Ostia, a lot of people can get atrial tachycardia out of that area.

So they're basically automatic focal arrhythmias that are arising out of some type of disease, usually atrial myocardium.

So the heart rate often 120 to 1 £0.50 wave different from sinus rhythm.

The RPE is much greater than the PR interval.

The PR interval is kind of normal. If we give them vagal maneuvers.

We didn't talk about adenosine. I kind of skipped that over that when we were talking before.

So people can do those vagal maneuvers to stop their arrhythmia.

Adenosine is an intravenous medicine that can also block the conduction just for a few seconds to try to stop people's SVT.

If you have one of these arrhythmias that's coming from a focal spot in the upper chamber of the heart,

it's not dependent on the AV node, so it doesn't care if you give it maneuvers to block the AP node.

It doesn't stop with that. This, unlike some of the other diseases, is more associated with other medical problems that the patient may be having,

and it's associated more with structural heart disease. And it's older people.

So people can have drug toxicity. They can have thyroid toxic ptosis.

They can have an endocrine tumor called a chromosome stoma.

The big problem is this one is a bit harder for us to zap and get rid of,

because sometimes when you sedate the patient for the procedure completely goes away.

It's all gone. And should I maybe.

Yeah, those are the P waves. They're upside down. Maybe. Should I stop there?

Irregular tachycardia. That's where we got to. We've got, like, five minutes left.

One minute. Okay. Yeah. Why don't we stop there?

Does anybody have any questions? Okay.

Cool too. Yeah.

Because.

