[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good morning, Lord. All right. Good.

So how is everybody? Good.

The weekend is near. Good. All right.

So, uh, our roadmap for today is that I'll briefly review what we did last Tuesday.

So. Just to let it marinate for a little bit more.

Uh, then we'll switch gears. Uh, we'll briefly talk about, uh, the sliding filament theory.

Uh, excitation contraction coupling. What happens at the sort of molecular level, uh, of contracting, uh, cardiac myocytes.

But the the bulk of today's lecture is probably going to be over here.

We're going to take a systems level view of the isolated, um, ventricle.

And we'll talk about pressure volume relationships and the cardiac cycle.

But the cardiac cycle not from a pressure versus time perspective as we've done it in the second lecture.

But from the pressure volume perspective.

And the same kind of terminology will come up. But um, from a slightly different perspective.

Okay. So where did we leave it last time?

Uh, we talked about the peripheral circulation, meaning everything from the aorta all the way back to the right atrium.

Systemic circulation, peripheral circulation. That's. We use this interchangeably.

So we divided our cardiovascular system into four major blocks right heart,

pulmonary circulation, left heart and right heart, pulmonary circulation, and left heart.

Um, we also collectively called the Heart Lung Pumping Unit.

Right. We talked about this over here and only this over here.

Right. Today we'll talk about either the left ventricle. The right ventricle doesn't really matter which ventricle we have in our mind.

And on Tuesday we'll talk about the heart lung pumping unit.

We've put everything together.

What we did is we said we want to get the input output relationship of the peripheral circulation in terms of two variables.

One the independent variable is the downstream pressure.

The filling pressure over here, which we also define as the mean right atrial pressure with reference to atmosphere.

Atmosphere swirled around us. And I'll clarify that with reference to atmosphere in a second.

And the volumetric fluoride going through the peripheral circulation, which is cardiac output.

When steady state, nothing is changing. Right.

Okay, so we went through all of this.

We went through the biophysical properties. Where are the resistances?

What are compliances? Where are the compliances? What are the larger compliances?

What are the smaller compliances. About 2ml/mm mercury for the entire arterial larger artery arterial system compliance compared to 100mm of mercury.

Uh, 100ml per millimeters of mercury that's sitting here on the venous side.

Large capacitance vessels. Right. A lot of storage.

Right. High pressure over here. Low pressure over here. High resistance over here.

Very low resistance to venous return. Right.

And we said that we we, um, model this.

It's simply in terms of two. Uh, elements.

The elasticity of the arteries and the veins. The vascular elasticity.

Right. And the resistance to flow. What we think of this here as the elasticity or compliance of the arterial system or the systemic arterial system.

This is the elasticity or the compliance of the systemic system.

Okay. Major resistance at the level of the micro circulation.

Approximately one peripheral resistance units. Millimeters times seconds per milliliter.

Right. Compare that to the resistance to venous return.

Over here. It's almost two orders of magnitude slower. All right.

Nothing is time changing. Nothing is nonlinear.

We know these are significant simplifications, and there will be times where we run up against those simplifications and these assumptions.

All right. And then we engaged in a little bit of algebra.

Applying the constitutive relationships for the resistance, the pressure flow relationship, and the pressure volume relationships over here.

And what we wanted to do is we wanted to get rid of the dependent variables p v over PA over here.

And express the flow that's going through this in steady state, purely as a function of the independent variable f over here,

and the parameters of the system that are shown over here, plus the volumes that we impose.

Right. Total volume and total zero pressure filling. And when we did this, we came up with it with a description that is shown down here.

This is sort of the algebraic solution and this is a graphical solution.

All right. This was the major result of our lecture last time of our labors.

Over. Uh. Um. Two slides of of of mathematical manipulations.

And I said, fear not, because this looks should look familiar, right?

We have a pressure. We have a flow going through a resistive capacitive network over here in steady state.

That flow is given by a pressure difference in the numerator over some resistance in the denominator.

Right. The units pan out because this is in millimeters of mercury.

Both of these and that weighting factor over here in front of this RA is unitless right.

You have compliance in the numerator. You have the compliance in the denominator.

Right. So it's just a weighted sum of the two resistances that are in the system.

In the way. The reason why it looks so maybe a little, um, strange at the beginning is because we replace the upstream pressure.

Which ostensibly we would say intuitively,

is par right by a representative of a characteristic pressure that is only dependent on other parameters in the system,

which we call the mean systemic pressure. And the mean systemic pressure is defined as the total distance in blood volume.

So v total minus the total zero pressure filling volume.

Over the total capacitance of the peripheral circulation car plus CV.

All right. So the only dependent. Independent variable here.

And the only dependent variable is Q. We try to argue intuitively.

Does this make sense? Right? If our feeling pressure is up.

Miss mean systemic pressure. The numerator is zero.

We have no flow going through the system. But now we're lowering the downstream pressure right.

You have more flow going through the pipe. And our model holds beautifully.

Up until a certain point here.

And the argument that I made over there is here our assumptions break down because we are no longer talking over a pipe.

We're talking about collapsible vessels. Right.

And so our beautiful constitutive law that says flow is equal to the pressure difference over the resistance no longer holds.

Or you could say it still holds, but the resistance becomes nonlinear. Right.

But the argument that I made is this argument over here.

Right.

If you're trying to aspirate your smoothie through a collapsible tube, you can try to generate as much negative pressure as you want with your cheeks.

Right. You will not get more flow rate through because at some point that straw will buckle, right.

And when it buckles, it constricts and the resistance will go up and therefore the flow will not go up.

Right. This competition between how much more negative pressure downstream you can generate and how much higher the resistance will go, right.

If you go way to negative, then yes, it can go into a state of constant collapse.

But that doesn't happen in the cardiovascular system. Usually there are conditions where you can actually get that to happen.

But it's stayed that I said a flow limitation, meaning that the flow that's going through the system becomes independent of the downstream pressure.

That's exactly what you see over here, right? This is the P2.

Here is the downstream pressure plays the role of our filling pressure.

The moment that we hit that zero trans neural pressure point.

Right. I can try to generate more and more negative pressure downstream, but the flow is not going to go up.

It's just going to stay constant because it's driven by the upstream pressure minus the external pressure,

no longer by the upstream pressure minus the downstream.

Now, you might ask, does this actually happen in the cardiovascular system yet it does happen.

Where does this flow limitation actually occur? Here is our heart, right?

Is our thorax. Diaphragm. With the chest closed.

The pressure external to the heart is intra thoracic pressure or pleural pressure.

Right. That pressure is a negative. Meaning even if the right atrial pressure or feeling pressure is zero.

The transmittal pressure is still approximately four millimeters of mercury positive.

Right. Because you have zero minus -four millimeters of mercury.

All right. It's four millimeters of mercury.

So turns out that even if this is zero over here, the intra thoracic structures are venous structures are actually still distended.

Simply because it has a negative pressure around it. So where does the flow collapse actually occur?

It occurs at the entry point of the superior and the inferior vena cava.

Into the thorax. Because if this pressure is zero over here, you have very, very little pressure drop from the IVC and the SEC to the right atrium.

These are when distended large vessels. Right. So if this is let's say -0.5 you might have zero over here.

I know if this is zero you might have just like. Point five over here, right?

The pressure. External. To add.

You know, the entry point here in the neck and in the abdomen is essentially atmospheric pressure.

Unless we constrict our muscles right of the abdomen.

Our intra abdominal pressure is our intra abdominal cavity is not pressurized.

It is essentially zero. Same with our tissue over here.

Right? You see, you have some elasticity on your neck, right?

It's essentially zero. Uh, the tissue pressure is essentially zero over here.

So the point where that flow limitation occurs is really at the entry point here of the inferior vena cava and the superior.

Okay. Typically not. At the level in the closed chest, typically not at the level of the right atrium.

Now. As we would point out in the next lecture.

The development that we've done so far with that need happening at zero filling pressure is strictly.

Speaking for an OpenShift configuration.

If you have a closed chess configuration, then the collapse really a feeling pressure of its mean right atrial pressure,

a reference to atmosphere happens at a slightly lower point.

Right? Around -four millimeters of mercury because you have the intra thoracic pressure that holds these structures open.

We'll get back to that when we talk about the heart lung pumping unit and taking inter thoracic pressure into account.

Okay, so not happening in the closed chest at the level of the right atrium or the intra

thoracic compartment is just at that entry point where that flow limitation occurs.

Then we said, does this have anything to do with reality? Um, or what's the benefit?

Let me take a step back. The benefit is that I can ask you the question.

What happens to all of the things being equal, the flow through the peripheral circulation if you double the resistance.

Right. Well you can look at this performance characteristic curve if you will.

This is the normal for normal parameters. And you drop right by a factor of half.

You can actually compute what that would look. If you double it.

You can compute what that would look like. So you can start to predict the behavior of the system.

Which otherwise might have not been a priori obvious. You can also tell me immediately that if I only change resistance.

That the mean systemic pressure would not change. Because it's purely dependent on the volume.

Total volume, minus total zero pressure filling volume over the capacitance resistance and entering into TMS.

Right. Okay. And we looked at the very end briefly through experimental data.

This is from a dog where I said this fistula. Yeah.

How would you change the resistance? Here. Yeah.

So experimentally, it's not trivial. Right.

So as I also said, uh, that we think of the resistances and the compliances to actually to, to be independent variables.

Right. And let's say you give a drug that affects the vascular smooth muscle.

It should affect both the arteries and veins.

Right. So it can affect the filling status by the veins constricting.

Right. It can bring down the uh the zero pressure within the filling volume.

Right. But it could also affect the compliance. So the compliance part we will talk about when we talk about control right now,

the the fact that you might be selectively changing the resistance right is done over here by this fistula.

Right where you say I'm not actually infusing a drug. What I'm actually doing is I'm just opening a short circuit.

Right. But if I were to give a drug, let's say an alpha agonist that both constricts.

Smooth muscle on the arterial. On the business side, you would be affecting both the volume status of the of the animal and the resistance.

So that is the art of experimentation, that you can actually just isolate something.

Um, and you have to think very carefully of how you would do it.

If you want to do it with drugs, you have to look at drugs that selectively, you know,

do alpha constriction at the level of the arterials rather than the venous vents.

But here is a mechanical right here is what we just do a short circuit.

We are dropping resistance significantly by doing that.

And you see that the mean systemic pressure here doesn't change but the slope changes quite substantially.

You're also still plateauing off at, you know, approximately the same level.

Right. It's not a sharp edge as we've seen in the in our diagrammatic representation, but it's really more of a roll of.

Now, what happens if you change PMS? Well, strictly speaking, if we only change PMS, it's only the offset that we're moving around over here.

The slopes are going to change. Right. At least theoretically.

Now here what is done is we are manipulating blood volume.

And what I pointed out last time already is exactly to the point that was just made, right?

Yes. The first order effect is that we are moving this intersection point to the right and to the left,

depending on how much volume we give or withdraw, right. But you can also see that there is actually a slight change in the slope.

So these parameters are not truly independent as we assume over here.

Right. Okay. This is where we stopped.

There's one more piece that I want to, uh, wrap up from the last lecture.

And that is what is called here, the winkle approximation. And, uh, this is now our model for the peripheral circulation.

And as I said on Tuesday, we'll put all of these things together and look at the, uh, closed loop behavior of the intact cardiovascular system.

But oftentimes we're just interested in the arterial pulse. We are only interested in the arterial side of the system.

How do we relate, for example, pulse pressure to stroke volume?

Can we do that? Right. And one recognition that was made is the fact that this capacitance over here is very large,

meaning it would take significant amount of volume to change this pressure.

Another way to say this, or another sort of different observation, but in a similar line,

is that the feeling pressure here is approximately equal to zero.

Right? I mean, right atrial pressure with reference to atmosphere is approximately equal to zero.

This resistance is very small. So the difference between this pressure and this pressure is going to be very, very small.

So one recognition is why don't we just. So two points.

Number one this is very small compared to this right. This is about 90.

This is about zero. And the other one, it takes a lot of volume to actually make this pressure move.

So why don't we actually just short circuit this? Why don't we actually make this the ground and say this venous pressure here is essentially zero?

Right. Just keep it at zero. And that means that we are actually forgetting about this resistance.

We forget about this compliance, and we just connect this point to this point over here.

And that's what you see over here. Right. So this model over here ignores the venous side of the peripheral circulation.

It just says the downstream pressure is essentially zero and it ain't changing.

Right. But what it does teach us is about the arterial pots.

Right. So we still have that 2ml/mm mercury of.

A compliance of the arterial tree. And we still have Ray, which is our total peripheral resistance.

Right. One peripheral resistance units. So what would a model like this help us understand?

Well, it helps us understand the shape of the arterial pressure waveform.

That positivity. Right. Uh, in relation to the source, which is not shown over here, which is the heart.

And allow us to maybe estimate some of this. Parameters are a Ka and stroke volume from the peripheral arterial points.

Right. So it doesn't get more condensed than that.

And so we do need a heart. So he has a heart shown as a current source.

Just think of this that every three seconds there's an impulse ejection that's happening.

Something you deposit an amount of stroke volume in the arterial tree over a very short period of time.

Right. So? Essentially impulse ejection.

Right. When you do this, when one of these pulses comes in here.

Right. You cannot instantaneously push that fluid through the resistance.

Just not possible. Right. So essentially all of this delta v over here that you inject is deposited on this capacitance.

So instantaneously that pressure over here will jump up.

And it jumps. It jumps up. By how much?

Well. By C times Delta v.

By Delta V here being the volume. Right.

And see being the compliance. So that but that delta P that is being sort of produced over here is our pulse pressure.

All right. And then our systolic ejection period is very, very small in this particular presentation is infinitesimally small.

Right. But then the rest of that period before you get the next ejection is all diastole diastole.

Right. So now you've actually this pressure here has jumped up.

Right. And now you have all of that time for that pulse actually to decay before the next pulse comes and you decay.

So it's essentially, as I said, a model of the arterial pulse in a very, very rudimentary manner.

So if you start at zero and you have the first pulse.

Right? That delta uh, that delta p over here is delta V over K.

Then the capacitor discharges.

You know, the arterial, the arteries recoils through the peripheral resistance.

You have this run off and boom, the next one comes. Right, then repeats itself same repeats itself.

Several pieces. What's the time constant of decay over here?

Right. It's our eight times the. What's the time constant of the overall behavior at which you actually reach steady state?

Also eight times the. So if you're interested in sort of the temporal dynamics of the arterial tree,

you can estimate that either from within a beat or longer term variations.

You know, across many beats. But the point here is that this is a performance representation of the arterial pulse.

Of course, we know it has like a finite ejection period.

And then there might be some reflection and so on and so forth. Right.

But it represents the phenomenology.

Of the arterial pulse. You have quick ejection. You have decay.

Quick ejection. Decay. Right. And as I said, you start from zero over here and eventually you reach some steady state.

Cardiovascular system doesn't blow up. Right. So that steady state is reached when the amount of flow,

or the amount of volume that's injected in one beat is exactly equal to the

amount of volume that is lost into the periphery during the diastolic runoff.

Right. Okay, so the power of the Wind Castle model is that it really allows you to conceptualize the arterial path and that you can say,

well, if I have the pulse pressure over here. Right.

And I know that the arterial compliance is about two milliliters per millimeters of mercury.

You could say well approximately what's the stroke volume. All right.

You can compute that. Because that would be also pressure.

Council compliance. Yeah. So exactly right.

So doing the ejection. Because what we are assuming over here is that the ejection is essentially instantaneous.

Right. All of that volume initially is deposited on the capacitance.

You cannot push your current instantaneously through. I mean an impulsive current through the through a resistance.

Right. So during that very brief ejection period, all of that volume delta v is deposited on this.

It's essentially like think of it physiologically right. So the heart ejects very rapidly.

What the arterial system is going to do is just going to expand.

Right. Because you have that balloon ish kind of behavior of the large arteries.

Right. The elastic. Right. So they will expand.

They will they will accommodate that stroke volume. And then during the diastolic phase, they will passively recoil.

And that's when you have the runoff. Of course, in reality you have a finite injection period over here.

And if you have a finite injection period, then doing that injection period there will be a little bit of runoff.

Okay, so anything to do with reality again?

Here is the pressure. Arterial pressure and the flow.

Um, in a dog. Uh, rabbit. Not dog.

Rabbit. Aorta. So ultrasonic flow probe was placed around the root of the aorta.

Right. So you can measure the volumetric flow rate that's coming out instantaneously.

And you have a catheter in the root of the aorta.

Now when? Don't have any impulsive ejection over here.

Right. We do have a finite ejection period.

In that finite rejection period here coincides with the rise of the arterial pressure waveform.

Right. And when that becomes zero, somewhere over here. The aortic valve closes and you're going into the diastolic phase.

All right. At this point. Over here, we engaged in a maneuver called vagal stimulation.

Yeah. We haven't told you yet what the vagus nerve is, but we will talk a lot about it when we talk about the control of the cardiovascular system.

It's one of the major cardio depressor nerves, meaning that if I stimulate that,

it will slow your heart rate down to the point of full cardiac arrest.

Right. And you might have heard about a carotid massage that some patients engage in some of the maneuver.

Talk about all of this. Here what we've done is we've we've dissected the neck of the rabbit.

We used stimulator electrodes and we stimulated the vagus nerve.

And so what it does, it comes a lot of acetylcholine on the SA node.

And essentially stops the heartbeat altogether. When you do that, you see a beautiful, nice exponential decay.

Of the arterial blood pressure waveform. Because there's no more reflected waves that are coming back.

There's no more ejection going into it, demonstrating that.

In aggregate, the arterial system. Acts in accordance to essentially of increased representation,

or the Winchester representation is a good representation of the aggregate behavior of the cardiovascular system.

All other things like reflected ways, you know, having died out.

Right. Question what ultimately if you if we were to actually let that go all the way

for a long period of time before we actually stop stimulating the vagus nerve?

What is the name of the pressure that this would equilibrate towards?

It's the mean systemic pressure. Very good. Right.

Very good. Because now we are exactly in that behavior. We are saying, all right, we're stopping all inflow.

We're not stopping the outflow. It was stopping all inflow.

But I guess we're stopping the outflow because the heart stopped, right? Stopping all inflow.

Stopping all outflow. Arterial pressure will come down. Venous pressure will come up.

Not shown over here. Your collaborating ultimately to mean systemic pressure on the order of ten millimeters of mercury.

Okay. So we'll have some. Yeah.

So I think what I said is that the Winchester approximation is a good a good model for the behavior of the arterial systemic arterial tree.

If we stop the heart, right, then you have that rock.

And this here is just to demonstrate that that sort of mono exponential decay that is implied by, by this model over here.

Right. So there's only one time constant here that, that is related to RA times Ka right.

Is actually what we see in, in the behavior of the actual system.

Does that make more sense? It's.

Oh, yeah. Okay, so that's the time constant of the decay over here, right?

There is a time constant that is, tau is ra time ka.

The ancillary point that I've made is that if you have a longer term dynamics where the system behaves or responds to perturbations over longer,

let's say a step change over a longer period of time, that time constant is also RA times.

Because it's the only time constant we have. So you could if you're interested in I think I mean, at that point,

if you're interested in estimating that time constraint, you can do that from within a cycle or across many cycles.

So the decay that I'm showing in the rabbit here is the the fact that you could actually,

you could try to estimate the time constant from the decay over here.

Right. The point that was done over here is the stop, the hard.

Right and prevent the next bit from coming.

You have a much longer timescale and you see more prominently sort of the mono exponential nature of that decay.

Right, would be difficult. I mean, here you could already say it's like, well, Thomas, I mean, you could also fit a line to this, right?

What are you talking about? Right.

So but once you actually say, all right, let me actually stop the heart and see how that decay happens over a longer timescales.

It is truly sort of a mono exponential nature. Exactly right in that approximation, right?

Okay. All right. You'll have some, some some, uh, opportunity to play with that.

I think in the next homework assignment that we'll post later today. All right.

So. Switching gears. Now we talk about the heart.

We park the peripheral circulation to the second half of or to the last third of the Tuesday lecture,

and we just have to review a little bit about the physiology of, of excitation contraction coupling.

And then we'll talk about the behavior of the isolated ventricle.

So we talked about. The heart.

We talked about the myo fibers, the orientation, um, and and the thickness of the walls over here compared to over here.

And the reason or at least given an explanation of why we think that towards the apex, the wall thickness is thinner than what is depicted over here.

If we start to zoom in. We see individual.

Muscle cells. But we also see that the the arrangement of these cells.

Is essentially like a network and for a long period of time, um.

Physiologist, physicist. Physiologist thought that. That the muscle cells in skeletal muscles in the heart would actually be a network.

Would not be individual cells, but would be a network. Um, and so incision essentially.

Uh, of of uh units of, of of um cells or of, of um elemental units.

But it would actually. Uh, not really have a cellular structure underneath.

Now, we know that the elemental building block of any organ is the cell.

Right. But functionally, it still acts as a own system and still acts as a network.

Right. And that it is tightly connected. These are tightly connected to one another.

There's some structure to it that we already talked about in terms of the, um, in terms of the, uh, the fiber orientation.

Um. When we zoom in a little bit more.

Right. We also see functional units over here. We see these characteristic striations that we have in skeletal muscle.

Also in the in the cardiac muscle. Over here we also have these things called gap junctions.

Which are low resistance pathways,

as we will see further in the electrophysiology part when we're talking about the electrical activity of these cells.

So today we're only talking about the mechanical behavior a little bit about the lecture, but mostly about the mechanical.

But this is low resistance pathways for currents to path from one cell to another,

meaning that the communication in terms of electrical signals from one cell to the other is really

greatly benefited by the fact that there are regions in the cell wall over here where that,

um, uh, where there is low resistance and, and currents can flow fairly easily.

Details are not important, um, at this stage, but the there are, um, uh,

channels that are very specific to these gap junctions and can be open and

closed and that these channels are responsible for that low resistance pathway.

As I said, we'll talk a little bit more about this when we talk about, uh, um.

The, um, uh, the electrophysiology.

When we go from the muscle fiber over here to the individual fiber, meaning that it's a sort of an arrangement of of, uh, many of these, um, uh.

Fiber, fibrous structures and zoomed successively in, we come to the level of the individual sarcomere.

You've probably all heard about these kinds of things, but we have to talk briefly about this in the context of, um, cardiac contract contraction.

This is sort of this parallel arrangement of actin myosin filaments and cross bridge cycling that occurs between those,

um, at the level of these individual functional units that we have now,

depending on where you actually cut this over here, you might have very little overlap of the actin molecules,

the thin one and the myosin molecules, the thick ones over here.

Or you can have a lot of overlap that will be important for the behavior of the cardiovascular system.

We have the Sako lemma.

We have nations here of the plasma membrane into the um or surrounding this um um structure that provides stability but also provides pathways,

uh, deep into the cellular structure for ionic currents to occur.

Primarily through that tubule over here that we'll talk about in a second.

Right. But it provides a mechanical, um, structure.

And it uh, also provides, um, connection to the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which will um, uh, play a very important role over here.

As I said, we have this increasing resolution over here at the level of the individual unit.

We have this banding structure which comes from that parallel arrangement of the actin myosin filaments.

We have the thick myosin filaments with the myosin heads.

And we have the thin actin filaments, uh, that has the uh troponin and tropomyosin molecules wrapped around them.

And the interaction of those two and the control of those two is what gives, um, rise to the, um, uh, to that cross bridge cycling.

And let me actually just jump over the next two ones over here. Just to say over here, we have the, um, we have the, um, uh, actin molecule.

Over here we have the tropomyosin chain that's sort of helix wrapped around it.

And then we have the troponin molecule, which is the main regulatory unit.

All of this is in your book over described to about a couple of pages, 2 to 3 pages in chapter one.

Um, so uh, will assign that to reading.

I can describe all of this in words, but let me go to this one over here.

See whether the speaker works and let the robotic lady, uh, explain to you.

Much better than I would be able to. Is it coming?

No. Nothing's coming. Okay. So much for that.

One second. Let me see what I can run it off my speaker.

Technology at MIT doesn't always work. Does this work?

The sarcomere shortens when myosin. Can you hear?

Is it loud enough? Let's see that again.

The sarcomere shortens when myosin heads. The formation of a cross bridge is initiated when calcium ions released from the sarcoplasmic.

Tropomyosin moves away from the myosin binding sites on actin, allowing the myosin head.

To bind actin and form across bridge. Also note that the myosin head must be activated before a cross bridge cycle can begin.

This occurs when ATP binds to the myosin head and is hydrolyzed to ADP and inorganic phosphate.

The energy liberated from the hydrolysis of ATP activates the myosin head, forcing it into the position.

A cross bridge cycle may be divided into four steps.

Step one cross bridge formation.

The activated myosin head binds to actin, forming a cross bridge.

Inorganic phosphate is released. And the bond between myosin and atom becomes stronger.

The power stroke ATP is released and the activated myosin head pivots, sliding the thin myofilaments toward the center of the sarcomere.

Step three Cross bridge detachment.

When another ATP binds to the myosin head.

The link between the myosin head and actin weakens and the myosin head detaches.

Just for reactivation of the myosin head, ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP and inorganic phosphate.

The energy released during hydrolysis reactivates the myosin head.

Returning it to the current position. As long as the binding sites on actin remain exposed, the cross bridge cycle will repeat.

And as the cycle repeats, the thin myofilaments are pulled toward each other and the sarcomere shortens.

This shortening causes the whole muscle to contract. Cross bridge cycling ends when calcium ions.

Are actively transported back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

Troponin returns to its original shape, allowing triple myosin to glide over and cover the myosin binding site in.

All right. You have been properly instructed.

In the sliding filament theory. Now, what are the important pieces of this?

Right. Probably many of you have seen this before. If you haven't.

As I said, it's in your book. Um, the details to be understood on a conceptual level.

Where that actual contraction comes from.

Number one, when I show, I mean, when I, when I see this video, it's always like nature is amazing, right?

If you had to design this from scratch, good luck. Right?

I mean, in some sense, that's why we don't. Artificial organs. Right.

Difficult. Difficult to compete with something like this that have, you know.

Millions of years to evolve and optimize, right? That's number one.

Number two is what are the important pieces here? Right.

At the very beginning. It was the calcium binding.

Of. The binding of calcium to troponin.

Right. That's what initiated everything. That's number one.

Number two is the role of ATP and ATP, which is ultimately oxygen dependent.

So those are the two key things that we need to recognize here.

When we talk about excitation contraction, coupling excitation being the electrical impulse that rules it all,

that begins the whole process contraction, ultimately resulting in that cross bridge cycling.

Right. We have to recognize the role of calcium and the role of oxygen in both of them.

All right. So let's go through this. Number one.

And action potential comes by.

You haven't defined that yet, but let's say that the electrical polarity of the cell or part of the cell membrane changes.

Right. That can change the permeability of calcium channels.

Meaning it allows calcium to enter the cells. The amount of calcium that enters the cells typically very, very small.

Think of that as a trigger. It's called here.

I think somewhere it calls a spark, right? Well, it's called the spark over here.

Consider this a trigger. And we're talking about calcium induced calcium release.

Right. By calcium entering the cell.

They bind to so-called reality and receptors at the level of the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

Major stores of calcium inside of the cardiac myocytes.

Right. And what then happens is that the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

Releases a lot of calcium into the cytosol.

Ultimately binding. Here to the troponin.

And then the whole machinery that was just described in that video takes place, right?

The rotation of the tropomyosin cross, the attachment of the head, the cross bridge cycling.

Right. And that continues to happen. This crawling continues to happen.

Until when? Until the calcium is no longer available.

You remove calcium substrate from this process.

It dissociates from the troponin um binding site.

Right. And and the cross bridge cycling stops because the tropomyosin moves back into its protected position.

How does this happen? Well, it happens because there's a constitutive pumping that's happening over here.

Also the sarcoplasmic reticulum where there's even a feedback mechanism between

the calcium level over here that pumps the calcium back into the cells.

It's right into the into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Calcium induced calcium release competes with the reuptake of calcium into the sarcoplasmic.

So this is what is written out over here. And to spell it out a little bit further, to break it up into contraction and relaxation.

Right. Is that you have this action potential.

It opens the calcium channels, calcium into calcium release and binds to calcium and covers the binding sites.

Crush with psyche the muscle, construct a contract.

Right. So re polarizes meaning it goes back into its, its regular sort of electrical polarity.

Right. But the cytosolic calcium is pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum and small amount is pumped back out of the cell through pumps.

Focal myosin covers the binding site and actin, the quadrupole cycling stops and the muscle relaxes.

But that. Spark calcium versus the uptake of calcium, that is, is that balance between contraction relaxation contraction relaxation.

But the unbinding also depends on oxygen. So we think of the cardiac contraction as oxygen dependent.

But the relaxation is also. So if there's a mismatch between the oxygen supply to the heart.

And the demand of the heart. It's not just the systolic or the contractive phase of the cardiac cycle that might be affected.

It can also affect the degree to which the heart can relax effectively.

And both of these are important if we are describing the function of the heart as a pump.

So zooming in over here, we could spend lectures just on this unit over here.

And the pasta, you know. That was done.

The key element here is that we are talking at the level of the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

There's this forceful lamba and um, um, uh.

Complex that pumps the, um.

The calcium back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and it's under the influence of what is called cerca.

We might revisit that when we talk about heart failure and mishandling of calcium under certain conditions.

So that's why I want to just mention this over here at the current state of affairs of our knowledge.

Right. The important piece is that we have the calcium entering the cell,

calcium induced calcium release through these free antigen receptors that provide troponin with the substrate to bind and cover the binding sites.

Cross bridge cycling to occur under the influence of oxygen, right then the constitutive re uptake of calcium back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

The pumping out of calcium out of the cell right, reducing the substrate covering of the binding sites under oxygen consumption,

relaxation or crossbreed site cycling stops and binding of the myosin head relaxation can occur.

Yeah. Substrate availability.

Right. So it's Macgillis mentioned kind of relationships.

Okay, so, so much for the cellular machinery, right.

Take a look at it. If it's if if you haven't seen it before.

Otherwise I probably haven't told you much new here.

Suffice it to say, when we talk about vascular smooth muscle, it's slightly different.

There's also actin. There's also myosin right. The arrangement is different.

And as we will see the controlling unit is also different.

Right. So the rest of today's lecture will be on the heart as a pump.

But I would say let's start to take the break now. We'll come back at 11, let's say 1140.

And then we'll cover the main topic for today's lecture.

All right, let's get settled. We'll continue.

Okay. So we talked about the cellular machinery.

But now we want to sort of zoom up to the system level and um,

go from sort of the the mile side cost per cycling to length tension relationship

of muscle fibers and then to pressure volume relationships of the entire chamber.

So. Modeling the heart as a pump.

And we'll start with a simple experiment. Assume that we can take one of those muscle fibers out of the heart.

We can keep it alive. And at the macro level we want to measure its length tension, relationship.

Sorry, both in the relaxed state but also in the activated state.

And understand how the muscle fibers actually go from the relaxed state when we then stimulate it and it generates a tension in what that dynamics is.

All right. So but the experimental apparatus is very high tech.

Thank you. I think they did.

It's just that it, you know, they were kind enough not to point it out.

All right. Why am I reminded of Waldorf and Statler?

Get off the stage, you bum. Um. So, uh.

Yes. Longstanding relationship. So we have all muscle fiber over here, right?

So we can do two things. We can make it contract against the constant load.

And that's what you're what's shown over here. This is a weight, right?

So if you stimulated it contracts.

But it lifts against the constant load. Constant, uh, weight.

Right. And you can change that weight. What's. It's lighter weight.

It's heavier, but it's, um, in some sense we can call it an isotonic contraction because you're contracting cancer in constant load.

Now, you can also. Bolt this thing down, right.

And then you can still activate this muscle and it will still generate a force, but at constant length because you don't allow it to constrict.

Right. So that would be an um. Uh iso volumetric or iso length contraction.

Okay. So but here what we're doing is we're allowing the muscle fiber to actually lift this weight off the floor.

And what we're showing over here is the active tension that's being generated.

So it's a change in the tension that you measure at the beginning and at the end as a function of that sarcomere length.

All right. Meaning at the at as a, you know, as a function of what we, what we would call the preload.

So by how much do you actually stretch this fiber to begin with.

Right. And what you remember is that you have we have these actin myosin filaments that that have overlap.

And they need this overlap in order to form these, um, cross bridges.

Right. If there's no overlap, you cannot you cannot cycle.

Right. But what this shows as a function of the initial sarcomere length,

you can actually over a certain range or regime here of your sarcomere length generate a higher pressure.

Meaning the more I initially stretch. The more tension the muscle fiber can actually generate up to a certain point when you plateau.

And if you were to stretch this even further, you would probably roll off again.

The way that this is often described is if these actin myosin filaments are too, um.

Tightly crossed in some sense, right?

You can generate a certain force, but you don't have the dynamic range to actually do much cross bridge cycling.

Now, as I actually stretch this muscle,

there might be an optimal overlap between how many of these myosin heads can actually bind and how much space you have in order to do that.

Cross bridge cycling. And that what ultimately generates that plot over here right now,

once you actually stretch beyond that, you're again reducing the number of myosin actin connections.

And that's where you're falling off that that edge.

But it's not showing over here. So that tension that you can generate is reduced.

This is a series of these experiments.

It's actually fairly important to understand, uh, for the behavior of the car of, of the, uh, of the myocytes and what is done over here.

So let me let me explain this. You what is done over here is essentially the passive stretching of the muscle fiber over here.

Same apparatus. Right. What I do is I have the muscle fiber here.

I just passively stretch it and I say, what's the tension that I'm actually generating by stretching this muscle fiber.

So essentially what you all did or you've all seen with, uh, Hooke's law, right,

in your intro physics lectures in high school or in college, I'm sure that there was like a huge.

Spring there was dangling from the ceiling, right. And you saw it bounce up and down and probably had to compute the cycle length.

Right? Same over here. You have a rubber band. You stretch it a little bit. What's the tension?

You stretch a little more. What's the tension. Right. That's what this one is down here.

So that's why this is called passive. I passively just simply stretch this.

The more I stretch it, the more tension is being generated.

Right. Or I have to generate more tension in order to stretch it more, depending on how you want to look at it, right?

But then I stimulate it, stimulate this muscle fiber, stretch it to a certain length, I provide a certain preload before I stimulate,

and then I can stimulate it either at constant length, asymmetrically right, or at constant afterload, or at constant, um, weight.

Right. Or it goes over here. So two different experiments that I can make.

So let's say I stretch it against a constant length.

And by the time it's done with its action, you know, excitation, contraction, coupling.

Turns out that the peak force that's being generated is this one over here.

Right. Now I go back to my initial state and I do exactly the same stimulation, but I let it contract against the constant load.

Right? And then it's this point that is recovered over here.

The remarkable piece of information here is.

And then I can do this, you know, for different reloads. Right.

It's shown over here. The remarkable point over here is no matter whether I contract against the constant load.

Or at constant length. The peak force that's being generated by our muscle fibers all lie around one characteristic curve.

All right. It doesn't matter. There's no two curves depending on whether I go horizontally or whether I go.

Vertically. So it doesn't matter whether the in some sense whether, you know, I keep the note in some sense,

it doesn't matter whether I keep the length constant or keep the load constant.

The peak forces generated all collapse fall on one characteristic curve.

Meaning how I get there doesn't matter. What matters is that I can I go to a certain preload, right.

I end up on this same curve, no matter whether it's constant load or constant length.

Why is it important to some of the contraction of the heart?

Is it constant? Uh, load.

Right. Some of it is a constant lack. If you have a contraction, you have ejection, right?

It's not completely constant as we will see, but we will make that obstruction for now.

Okay. So important to realize whether we go this way or we go that way.

In the end, the collection of all the points for different reloads end up on the same curve.

So what does this allow us to do? We can think of the individual muscle fiber essentially as a two state spring model.

Right. We have our spring over here. We have a delta L that's being generated over here.

L minus L naught. Right. If it's in its relaxed state, it's just like that spring.

Just like that rubber band. We have a spring constant K over here.

Right. That is K passive. Okay. Rest. If it's in its contracted state.

It also behaves like a spring, but with a different spring constant, right?

So all the dynamics of the of that muscle fiber happens between is just that switching between being floppy and being stiff.

Floppy stiff, right? So these are sort of the boundaries of.

Our behavior of that muscle fiber. Right.

So it's either in one state or the other state and all that, that excitation contraction coupling does, it switches between that state.

Right. Cross cycling happens. You have maximum tension.

It takes a little bit of time to do that. Right. Because as you saw, this thing has to happen.

Right.

But all of that does is over a very short period of time, it actually switches the spring constant of the muscle fiber from this state to that state.

Right. And then the relaxation switches it from that state back to the state.

Okay. So that's at the level of the individual muscle fiber.

And the remarkable piece now is that if we go from the muscle fiber and we translate tension to pressure and length to volume.

At the same behavior. Still holds true.

Right. Intra ventricular pressure. Ventricular volume.

Passive relationship up to a certain point linear over here.

So that's the ventricle. Left ventricle.

Right ventricle. Right. You just allow it.

It's in its relaxed state. And you're just pushing more and more volume in.

And you're saying what's the wall tension that's actually being what's the pressure that's being generated.

Not the wall tension. What's the pressure that I need to impose in order to fill it to a certain volume of what I push the volume?

What's the pressure that's being generated? Right.

It is linear for a certain period of time, and then you get into sort of a non-linear behavior as you,

you know, do with any elastic material reaching the elastic limit.

Then you do exactly the same experiment. You actually stretch it to a certain length or volume,

stretching the muscle fibers to a certain length or ventricular, uh, chamber volume, uh, the entire chamber.

And you allow it to contract. And all of these and systolic pressure volume points begin fall on one line.

So we call this the diastolic pressure volume relationship.

And this is the end systolic pressure volume.

Kind of, you know, emphasis here is that throughout the entire diastole, right.

We are operating on this curve, right? And at the end of systole, at peak pressure, that's being at the end of systole.

We're touching this line over here. But for all other things being equal, there's two characteristic curves.

There's the passive curve. And then there's the active curve.

Right. And all the other behavior happens between those two elements.

Again a two state system within the relaxed state where you are in the contracted state, right?

But if you're in the relaxed state, you have essentially some elasticity around it.

And if you're in the end systolic state or the peak contracted state, you're on that end systolic pressure one.

Then you. So.

Because, as we will see shortly. Right. You are essentially when you are filling your moving wheels.

We'll show this just a few slides from now. When you are filling, you're actually moving passively along this curve, right?

But then when you are actually contracting, you're only touching this curve at one point.

And that's the end of. Okay, we'll get to that.

Okay now. There's also, um.

Sort of lack or limit of of the systolic pressure volume relationship over here.

For all intents and purposes, what we will do is we will look at this as a linear part over here.

And would make that a hard threshold.

When we reach the elastic limit, the volume limit of the ventricle, and we are only considering this as a linear pressure volume relationship.

Here we very rarely, if ever look at supraventricular pressures over here at the level of 250.

Okay. So then how can we model the single ventricle?

We can model that ventricle. Again as an element that has elasticity.

Same way that we had that element of elasticity for a vessel.

But we can truly think of the of, of the ventricle as, as a balloon.

Right. You fill it at a certain elasticity or compliance, then it changes its wall behavior.

Due to the excitation contraction coupling.

Right. And then it ejects. So.

It's this capacitive element because it has elasticity, it has the ability to store volume.

That's what this. Symbol represents the error.

Arrow through here represents its ability to be time varying.

Meaning that this compliance compared to the CIA and the CV that we had, the peripheral circulation is not constant.

In fact, is actually time varying. And what is that time variability?

Um. Well before we get there.

So the way that we can model the ventricle then is we have an inlet valve.

Represented by this symbol. Over here. Then we have our storage element, our volume storage element over here, which is our our ventricle.

And we have a valve on the outflow side.

Talking about the left ventricle. We have mitral.

And aortic valve. Right? We're not worrying right now about the atria only talking about the ventricle.

And so how do we model this C of T over here.

We can be in a high capacitive or floppy state.

Right. Or low capacity capacitance or contracted state.

Right when it's in a high capacity state. It.

As I said, this is floppy. It will have the filling phase.

Right. And then it switches to that and systolic.

Spring constant, so to speak, right? And you have that injection.

Now. Nature is not does not have usually these sharp edges.

Right. So there are some dynamics. It takes time to for calcium to enter, for cross recycling to happen and so on.

But can we actually. Can we actually determine this representation over here?

Right from experimental data. Yes we can.

And what is done over here is not the capacitance that has been measured in, um, in dogs, I think.

Yeah, but it's one over the capacitance, which is the elasticity.

So what they measured over here is not milliliters per millimeter or mercury but is millimeters of mercury per milliliter.

So it's just the inverse of that. But what you see over here is the experimental data.

This has been done with uh, um conductance catheter.

So you can actually put a catheter into the left ventricle and you can measure

the pressure and the volumes at the same time to some degree of approximation.

Right. And what was done over here is again, you see this experimental data over here.

And then the fit that was done over here is simply raised and scaled.

Sines and cosines. Why didn't you say that? The man.

There might be more of a linear approximation of you that might be better just to get a smooth curve.

And this is normalized to the peak license over here. And it's normalized to the systolic period.

Right. So this would be the transition from the high capacitance to the low capacitance state.

Right. And so this would be the the initiation of the contract, a contraction.

Then this would be the relaxation and this would be the, um, the, the uh, the rest of the diastolic period.

Now that's the license compliance is one over that.

Right. So if we just simply take and appropriately scale this for the dog in terms of the,

the timing, but also in terms of the amplitude, you take one over this.

This is what we're getting over here. Right.

So while the edges over here are a little rounder, it is actually a pretty reasonable approximation what we have over here, right?

We have a high compliance date during filling, low compliance date during, um, ejection.

And for all intents and purposes, this does look very similar to sort of this two state system.

There's a little bit of dynamics related to the fact that we cannot nature can have really true, um, step functions.

Right. But the experimental data.

Provide reasonable, um, justification for us to actually the first order approximation,

simply use this switching capacitor model for the behavior of the isolated ventricle.

Okay. All right. So.

We can put some numbers to this and we can compute the compliance over here.

So this is data I think also um I think it's for humans.

So the systolic compliance approximately 0.4ml per millimeters of mercury.

And the diastolic compliance on the order of 15 ish or so milliliters per millimeter.

Point for 15. Very different. Okay.

So what about that cycle? What about that dynamics and how do we represent the cardiac cycle now in that view of this pressure volume relationship.

And for that let's take the ventricle out of the animal right.

And hook it up to. A.

Reservoir. That provides constant preload.

Preload. We call this our feeling pressure over here.

Same feeling pressure that we introduced previously when we describe the peripheral circulation.

All right. Forget about the dynamics of the event of the atrium.

We are only interested in the ventricle right now.

We hook up the outflow tract of the ventricle to also a constant reservoir.

And we make sure that the moment that this ventricle ejecting, it's truly ejecting against the constant reservoir.

So we have runoff instantaneously from the afterload reservoir into the preload reservoir.

So we keep both of them constantly going throughout the entire cycle period.

Okay. So that's the experiment.

So now let's look at what that pressure volume relationship actually, um, that pressure volume relationship actually is.

Oops. So afterload is constant.

Right. And preload is constantly. Meaning we are filling at a constant pressure and we're pumping against constant pressure.

So let's start at point number one over here.

Which we call end of diastole. Right.

We call this the end diastolic pressure. PFF or end diastolic pressure.

And the associated volume is what we call the end diastolic volume.

Now. We switch.

From the diastolic state to the systolic state. Right.

When that happens, immediately the pressure increases because now we have a certain volume.

Why? We would change from a, um.

Uh, from a low capacity state, from a high capacity state to a low capacity state.

That means that the pressure is actually jumping up right instantaneously, making that spring constant step.

At a constant length. That means that the tension shoots up at constant volume.

That tension shoots up right until the pressure exceeds.

So this. This valve closes. Right.

Until that pressure exceeds the pressure in the in the afterload reservoir, so it exceeds the afterload.

At that point this valve opens right. And we're injecting into and against a constant afterload.

Right. Meaning at point two. So at point one, mitral valve closes.

We're going through a very brief period of ice volume contraction.

Point two aortic valve opens and we're ejecting against a constant afterload.

If the aortic valve wouldn't open, we would end up over here.

But now that the aortic valve is open, we end up over here.

At which point the ventricle starts to relax with switching back to the high capacitance.

Feeling. State of the heart of the of the ventricular capacitance.

Right. Aortic valve closes. We drop down to the level of the feeling pressure, at which point the mitral valve opens and we're feeling a constant.

Preload until the cycle repeats itself.

So the dynamics of the isolated ventricle traces a loop in that pressure volume representation of the ventricle right where you have filling.

I see volume contraction. Ejection and ISO volume equalization.

Exactly. The four phases of the cardiac cycle that we talked about two lectures ago,

when we looked at the pressure of the left ventricle as a function of time.

And we said that the opening and closing of the two valves as viewed from the point of view of the left ventricle.

Uniquely defined the four states of the cardiac cycle. Mitral valve.

Open aortic valve. Closed killing. Mitral valve open.

Aortic valve closed. But. Contraction being generated by economic contraction.

Mike. Aortic valve. Open mitral valve closed. Ejection.

Aortic valve closed. My fingers crossed, but relaxation is.

Okay? Yeah. So constant.

So constant afterload and constant preload only simplify things for us right here,

because what we want to understand is the behavior of the isolated ventricle.

Right. Again, if you actually were to do this exactly the same thing as we would do in a moment, or do we have it today or maybe.

Maybe later today. Um, in the intact circulation.

Right. The aortic pressure against which we pump would not be independent of the flow that the heart is giving out.

Right. So the reason why we are taking a step back over here, we're looking at the isolated ventricle is let's forget about changing afterload.

Let's forget about a changing preload. Right.

We just want to isolate the behavior of the ventricle. Crystallize that out first.

And then we will see how it actually behaves inside.

The changes that we will have to make to this view.

Are actually fairly minimal, but it's easier to do it in such an experimental setting first to understand the major concept.

Of these four phases of the cardiac cycle and how they are represented in the pressure volume loop over here.

The heart is contracting, right? But what we are measuring here is the pressure over here.

At this point. The pressure that it generates is dictated by the height of this reservoir.

Right. And because we have this runoff over here, as the heart is ejecting, the height of this reservoir is not changing.

Meaning if we didn't have this runoff over here, right then this would go up and there would be a time varying.

Afterload. Right. So essentially when this is opening over here, it is pumping against a constant load.

And it just it just exceeds it just meets that load.

Does that make sense? If this height were changing or if you were in situ, then this would no longer be flat.

Right and the heart would adjust to that. Okay.

Exactly right. That run off is exactly just to keep a constant preload and a constant afterload throughout the entire cardiac cycle.

Okay. Any other questions about this? Are you guys cool over there?

And diastolic volume is this volume that corresponds to this point one over here at the point end of diastole at the end of filling.

In corresponding end diastolic pressure is F over here.

Right. And systolic volume is a volume that corresponds to that point three over here.

And the end systolic pressure is here.

Over here is what we also call the. Okay.

These two points. End of diastole. End of systole.

And was cycling around in one heartbeat. Right.

Next heartbeat comes next heartbeat. Okay.

So the circuit representation for what I've just shown you over here is this.

We have a constant preload. We have a constant afterload.

Only interested in the dynamics of that switching capacitance model as a function of that.

So that's just what this is now. We looked at.

The cardiac output. And we said cardiac output is heart rate times stroke volume.

Right. In this view over here.

We can actually. Right. This is heart rate times and diastolic volume minus and systolic volume where edv is.

And diastolic air.

Volume and ESV is and.

Systolic. Volume.

Make sense? This is the filling state of the heart at end of diastole.

This at the end of systole. The difference between these two volumes I call this volume and diastolic volume.

Edv this volume and systolic volume ESV.

The difference between those is a stroke volume because this is one cardiac cycle.

So this differences over here is what the heart is pushing out with one stroke.

And stroke for you now. We can express the end diastolic volume.

In the end, systolic systolic volume in terms of the zero pressure filling volume or the dead volume of the ventricle.

And this just one of the ventricle.

Here we can write that this is heart rate. Times dead volume of the ventricle plus the diastolic compliance.

Times the how do we write it over here?

The feeling pressure. This is our end diastolic volume minus the dead volume.

Minus the systolic compliance times the afterload.

Here we assume that the NDIS, the dead volume of the zero pressure filling volume of the ventricle in Sicilian diastole at the same.

Strictly speaking. Probably not, but.

We assume that they're the same, right? And so the difference is probably very negligible.

So what we can then write that this is heart rate times.

Diastolic capacitance of the ventricle times the filling pressure minus systolic capacitance times afterload.

That's what's shown over here. All right.

There's an increasing amount of whispering. Let us know of the questions you might have.

Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So all I'm doing is I'm expressing this volume over here, right?

In terms of the dead volume that we have over here.

Right? Um. So in your mind, you kind of have to flip this around, because this is one city over here.

Right. But essentially what I'm saying is, what is this point over here?

Right. As a function of the pressure.

So we have a dead volume over here. And then we have a linear slope of the volume as a function of the pressure.

And that is. The intercept over here, plus the constant slope times.

Pressure. The same over here. All right.

So what I've done over here, I've written stroke three is in diastolic volume minus in systolic volume.

And then I've done this linear approximation or this linear representation of

the and diastolic volume as the dead volume of the ventricle plus CD times

VF minus in parentheses and systolic volume represented in the same way right as V plus yes minus PR because there's a negative sign that translates.

Then the dead volumes cancel out over here and we're left with this.

So from the perspective of the single ventricle.

The stroke volume is given by CdPH minus CcpA.

Is an important performance characteristic that we will talk about a lot when we talk about heart failure, and that is the ejection fraction.

F. Ejection.

Fraction. And this is the end diastolic volume.

Um sorry. The stroke volume over the end diastolic volume.

So first point of emphasis is hard, not empty at the end of systole, right?

You're not squeezing the heart till it's empty. Right.

There's an end systolic volume that's left in the ventricle.

And what? The ejection fraction over here.

What what it measures is how much essentially what's the fraction of the diastolic volume that's ejected as a stroke volume.

User lounge what, 5,560% of normal healthy subjects?

But when we get to certain types of heart failure, then we might see something like 20%, meaning that you might have a big heart that does this.

Right. As opposed to a smaller heart that does this.

So it's an important performance metric of the heart as a pump.

And we can write this as in diastolic volume minus and systolic volume over entire static volume, or it's one minus and systolic volume over entire.

Okay. All right. So, so far, so good.

So question to you guys.

What's the stroke work? What's the work that the heart is doing?

Is that represented here? Right.

It's the area. Right. So someone asked me earlier about the Carnot cycle, right?

Who was who? Ask me about the kernel cycle. Uh, over there.

All right. You should have answered that question. So if we're interested in in the work that the heart is doing.

Right. It's really the area of this. So PDV.

You might remember from your thermodynamics class where mechanics classes PDV is a is a measure of work.

Right. And so if you integrate over PDV over here, so you actually compute the area of this, this is the work that the hard is doing.

Meaning if you have hypertension, you have very high blood pressure against which the heart has to pump, right?

All other things being equal, the heart has to do a lot more work. Right.

So I pretension not good. For the heart.

Okay. So. We can't feel the heart at infinitum.

And when we said that even for that individual fireside, when we actually stretch it to a certain distance, right.

Ultimately you might reach the elastic limit and you're not going to get more length for more tension.

So you're. Pressure volume relationship length tension relationship becomes curvilinear.

That is indicated here by this, um, dashed line.

Again. Rather than dealing with curvilinear functions, we just say, all right, you reach a certain limit and then you hit a wall.

Right. You're perfectly elastic. Until you hit the wall and you can't fill it anymore.

So then if we're interested in the cardiac output. All right.

Sorry. Should be careful. If we're interested in the ventricular output.

So what's the output of the single isolated ventricle?

As a function of the preload to the heart.

Right. This equation over here is what gives this to us.

And what I should say is just to make it clear. Let's call this V0 for ventricular output, not cardiac output.

We will reserve cardiac output as much as I will be able to pay attention to this for the output of the heart lung pumping unit.

Right. What is the ventricular output as a function of preload.

Right. It's given over here. Essentially.

I was saying essentially is because you could equate this to zero.

And you say for which filling pressures.

Would this be zero or negative? You can't have negative output.

The heart doesn't pump in the opposite direction, right?

But if you equate this to zero, you will see that p f equals kappa over KD is what is shown over here.

If the feeling pressure is less than that. You will have zero output, meaning you will not generate enough tension to overcome.

You have to load. Right. You're not generating enough pressure for the aortic valve to open.

You can generate that pressure, you're not going to put anything out. Now there is a range.

For PV. Where as you increase the filling pressure, you will linearly increase.

The output. And the slope of this curve is shown as f, c, d over here, F being the frequencies.

The heart rate right here is saying this heart rate times city right that slope.

Right heart rate times CD is f times KD meaning the more preload I give.

The more the heart is able to put out. Right.

That has to do with that stretching of the actin myosin filaments.

Right. Remember that that curve that I showed. Of the active tension that's being generated as a function of the sarcomere length, right?

The more preload I provide for an initial, you know, sort of curled up,

bunched up actin myosin molecules that you have better overlap, better overlap, better overlap.

And you create more and more and more output because you have more of these cross friction cycles.

But then if. You reach a certain preload or if your if if your if your ventricle.

If you reach the heart, stop. If you hit the wall with the kind of volume to which you can fill the ventricle.

Then you essentially become independent of the filling process.

You can try to force more in, but if you have a stiff ventricle that's filled to its limit, you will not increase further the ventricular.

Okay. Unbeknownst to you?

Probably. Maybe not. As a studio observers.

What have we done? We have characterized.

The input output relationship of the isolated ventricle in terms of the filling pressure.

And the output it can generate. All right.

Not quite there yet because this is the isolated ventricle.

It's not the heart lung pumping unit yet. But we are well on our path to generating the input output relationship of the heart lung pumping unit.

Because what we've just done is we've characterized the input output relationship of the length of the isolated ventricle.

We haven't put any numbers to that. It could be the right ventricle. It could be the left ventricle.

So what we have to do on Tuesday is just put the right with the left together,

figure something out about the pulmonary circulation, because that's in between the both of them.

And then figure out of what is that total input output.

It would be a very surprising result, I might add. Okay.

So three phases or three regimes, not three phases, three regimes.

You have the regime where the ventricle itself cannot generate enough pressure to overcome the afterload.

So the output of the ventricle is zero.

A regime where for an incremental increase in the feeling pressure, we get a concomitant linear increase in the ventricular output.

Right. And then a regime where the volume, the elastic limit of the ventricle is reached and becomes limiting in terms of the output of the ventricle.

Okay. All right. So.

We talked about the pressure versus time curves.

In the second lecture today, we talked about the pressure volume relationship or the representation of the cardiac cycle

in the time domain and the representation of the cardiac cycle in the pressure volume domain.

Now, if we give you timing information and if you give you volume information, you can go back and forth.

Because the mechanical element mitral valve closure, aortic valve opening, peak systolic pressure, and systolic pressure.

Mitral and aortic valve closure. Mitral valve opening are exactly represented in this diagram over here.

Now, what you see over here comes through the it goes back to the question that was asked.

Here when we look at the heart or the ventricle inside to.

We're not pumping against the constant afterload.

We're not drawing from a constant preload because as the heart is ejecting into the left ventricle, it's ejecting into the aorta, right.

The aortic pressure is going up. So incrementally with each delta V with each, you know, volume increment that we're pushing in the aorta.

The afterload gets a little bit higher right. Until it has time to run off a little bit.

So here when we are doing this representation in situ in the PV loop,

we are not you know, we don't have a flat line over here and a flat line over here.

But as we are starting to inject the pressure in the order, it's going up, up up, up, up until we reach the peak systolic pressure.

Right. And then the ventricular pressure starts to fall again until the aortic valve closes.

And I see volume equalization. And.

Mitral valve opens, right? But now you're at a very low pressure.

High capacitance state. Mitral valve opens the right atrium.

The left atrium have started to fill. They are actually quite full.

Right. It opens and you have a rapid influx which reduces.

The left atrial pressure in this case quite rapidly.

So you're coming down onto the entire solid curve.

But then all the filling is along the end diastolic pressure volume relationship.

Until the cycle repeats itself. While. So neither the ventricles nor the atria are empty at.

That's not completely empty. It becomes a passive conduit doing filling.

Right. Because the mitral valve or the tricuspid valve is open, backflow into the atria occur continuously.

Right. So when the when the atrioventricular valves are open, it's essentially becomes a passive conduit.

But it never empties to the point that you know.

It collapses. Okay. Yeah. Then you.

So if so, the the essentially um, if, if you're exceeding so CD times is a is a is a does in diastolic volume right CD times PV.

Right. And what this equation is essentially saying if CD CD is constant we think of CD as a constant.

Yeah, right. If the filling pressure exceeds.

Vmax over CD or if the descending volume.

That you would get for a certain pressure. Exceeds what? The maximum.

Right. It's the maximum that wins. You can't push the ventricle to have more volume than it can.

It can, uh, it can reach at it at its elastic limit.

That's essentially what this is saying over here. Okay.

So the other point that I wanted to make over here is, um.

How do we. How do. How can we increase stroke? Right. Right.

All other things being equal, if you actually were to move up slightly on the end diastolic pressure volume loop, uh, relationship over here.

Afterload being the same. You would end up exactly at the same point over here.

But you stroke volume would be increased. So we'll look at that in a little bit more detail here.

All of the things being equal. What if we increase the afterload?

Right. We have two identical twins.

One has hypertension, the other one doesn't. Right.

So here. What happens to your stove on?

Decreases quite substantially. Right.

Because if you have very high blood pressure, the diastolic blood pressure, arterial blood pressure will be high.

Right. In this particular case where the aortic valve opens.

You know, is is up here. It's a much higher pressure.

Right. Then we eject. And as we said, we always end up on this curve no matter how we want to get there.

Right at the end of systole, we end up on this curve unless we change something about the performance of the heart.

Right. So stroke volume significantly reduced.

Right. Now. Can we restore a stroke volume?

Yes we can. Right. What if we actually move the and diastolic pressure up just a little bit.

Right. So here's the end. Diastolic pressure. And now look what happens if you just move a few millimeters up.

Right. A few millimeters up. Here.

We had to increase the afterload by probably about, I would say somewhere between 50 and 100%.

Right. This distance over here, this distance would be almost the same.

Right. Massive reduction in stroke volume.

But we had to increase the afterload quite substantially. Here.

Because one over CD is so small or CD is so high.

If we go from an entire solid pressure, let's say this is eight millimeters of mercury and let's say this is ten 12mm of mercury,

we are moving way far out to the right on this curve over here right now.

All other things being equal. We would get a stroke volume, which is much, much larger.

But we can already draw from this that modifications in filling pressure in preload to the heart.

Can have very significant changes. On stroke one.

Just a few millimeters of mercury, right? Where is most of our capacitance?

Vascular capacitance, not cardiac. Vascular capacitance.

On the veins. What do the veins connect to? The right atrium.

Right. So let's say you have all of that blood volume sitting right next to the right atrium.

What do they have? They have smooth muscle. They constrict.

You can give yourself essentially an auto transfusion.

You can change that feeling pressure by a few millimeters of mercury can modulate stroke volume with that cardiac output quite substantially.

Right. Ingenious. Right has all to do with the fact that this overlap of the actin myosin filaments might have some optimum,

and you can actually generate you can actually move up and down that curve here by just a few millimeters of mercury.

Now again, this has anything to do with reality.

Again, we can we can use our animal of choice. We can measure these pressure volume loops.

And what you can see over here is what was done is the end diastolic pressure or internal sonic volume was, was uh, modulated.

And we go from a pressure volume like this to one that is wider to one this is much wider.

So you modulate the feeling state of the heart. And you can you can move that in in diastolic pressure volume group.

You know along this line over here. Now here they also changed the afterload.

Right. But all of this is borne out in in reality.

Okay. So far, we haven't changed anything about the heart, right?

We didn't. We said the heart does its thing, right?

We're not modulating. We're not messing around with anything of that calcium handling.

Right. There's a spark that comes stimulated.

There's a spark. It does. It's calcium induced calcium release.

Right. Whatever it is, however much calcium is being released or however much of that calcium is being taken up again.

But we can also modulate that loop where that loop operates by changing the end systolic pressure,

the slope of that end systolic pressure volume relationship, essentially by changing CHS.

The slope of that end systolic pressure volume relationship we call the contractility of the heart.

Or we will also call it the I know trophic state of the heart.

Um. Isotropic state of the heart contractility so we can increase contractility.

Make this deeper. Over here. Yes, more.

We can decrease the contractility. And we make the heart less efficient.

Increased efficiency. Decreased efficiency.

What do you think happens when you have a heart attack? To decrease.

The efficiency. So you actually mess with the, um, the, uh, effectiveness with, with the and systolic pressure one.

Really? You call this a contractility?

Now, a term for the end diastolic pressure volume relationship is, uh, often called Lucy therapy.

Not going to use that much. But we said that both the contraction and the relaxation are oxygen dependent.

Let's say you are in a state where the heart demands more oxygen than the poor coronary circulation is able to provide.

You would expect that the efficiency of the pump is reduced at the systolic level, and its ability to relax is also reduced.

So you might be lifting off the bottom here, which makes the.

To the two extremes of where you're operating a lot more inefficient, right?

The loop, the pressure volume loop will be a lot smaller. And that's what's shown over here.

So. Stroke volume and diastolic volume.

We already said ejection fraction is a stroke volume over the entire volume normal for us about 60%.

All right. Dogs can go much higher. But normal for 60%.

60% of the way. That sort of violence that's being ejected. Right.

So stroke volume is the difference over here. We're going around the loop.

We're again in the constant and diastolic and systolic pressure volume relationship.

Uh. Um. Constant afterload. Constant preload. Now we decrease the contractility.

For all other things being equal. Now we're hitting that end systolic pressure volume relationship much earlier.

Right. So our loop is like this. What happens to.

Ejection fraction decreases. Right.

We're keeping our end diastolic volume the same. Right.

But the stroke volume is massively reduced. Right.

So that when you have ischemia right, your heart is not in a good state and its performance as a pump is going down.

What if we exercise, right? If we exercise.

There are newer humoral mechanisms that we will speak about that might actually increase.

Contractility, meaning that that CSS is getting smaller one over CSS is getting larger, the slope is getting larger over here.

So we exercise all of the things being equal same end diastolic volume.

Right. But you're increasing your stroke volume quite significantly.

All right. So ejection fraction is going up. Yeah.

That would make it easy for in exchange for a.

Yeah. So the way to think about contractility goes back to calcium, right?

If I can, if I can be a lot more efficient in dumping more calcium right into the cell.

Or into the cytosol from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

Right. You have a lot more cost. Recycling availability.

Right. So that will increase the tension at the end of systole or throughout this historic cycle.

At the same time we. The efficiency with which the calcium is taken up also goes up.

Turns out that the second defensive linemen are actually responsive to the concentration of calcium.

So the more calcium there is, the more efficient it becomes.

So at the end of that relaxation cycle, you have dumped more calcium into the cell and you have taken up more calcium from the cell.

At the end of that process, you're pretty much at the same state.

Passive state. And so the end diastolic pressure, one relationship doesn't change all that much.

The kind of teleological explanation, but essentially the fact that the circa and the for lumber is also,

uh, it's efficiency depends is increased with increased calcium.

Actually leaves you with less, with, um, more or less the same calcium at the end of this entire process that we're in the state.

Right? Then you would lift off the diastolic portion of it.

Okay. That's a good question. All right. Again.

Can we see this in animals? Yes we can.

Right here is we're changing the isotropic state, meaning that we're changing that contractility state with some drug to mean, for example.

And a common question that we like to ask at homework assignments or exams like this, is how many contractile states are represented in this figure?

One. Two. Three. Six.

Two. Right. So when we think about the contractile state is.

This is one. Right, because you have one slope of the systolic pressure volume relationship.

And here is another. Right.

One of your colleagues from the previous year said, well, but isn't the diastolic set also technically of contract health status like.

All right. Right. Then it's like how many states of constant contractility are represented here too, right?

So one state of contractility is given by one of those lines, not by one of those points okay.

So but yes, you can vary that. And we do that all the time.

We stand up. The moment that you send up over here your contractility is going up.

Right because your cardiovascular system is adapting to the change.

In blood pressure. Right changing cardiac output.

Right as you're in a reasonably semi recumbent position over here while I'm lecturing.

Right. Yes, Charles. Thank you. I said semi recumbent and you just slid down.

Um. Your contractility might be going down a little bit because you are in a relaxed state.

All right. So that modulation is one of the key cardiovascular mechanisms of changing cardiac output.

The other one being. Heart rate.

Right. So one of them. Yes, the other one hr.

And we'll talk more about this when we talk about the, um, control of the cardiovascular system.

Okay. Yes it does, and we'll get to that.

It's called the tropic phenomenon.

Phenomenon because it actually it actually reduces the cycle length and therefore it reduces the amount of time available for the calcium re uptake.

So there's there's a coupling effect. Good point.

Diastolic pressure volume relationship. So we only looking at the diastolic portion over here right.

Want to emphasize. And drive home the message that.

Between the control state and the angina state. Doctors still talk about engine in our case presentation in the first case.

Right. The end diastolic pressure volume relationship changes.

Right. Because relaxation being an oxygen dependent process.

So it's not just that you affecting the systolic pressure volume relationship.

If you are a state of mismatch between oxygen demand and oxygen supply of the heart, you're also changing the diastolic pressure volume relationship.

Diastolic compliance we've already talked about. So if you are in a state where you where you are changing the diet.

So and systolic we talked about and diastolic we are changing state like in angina.

Right. Then you're also reducing the stroke volume available.

Okay. So I think that's that's about it. How can we measure this?

Well, there's there's various methods. Uh, 3D echo.

So echocardiography, ultrasound scene, MRI, meaning that we're getting the MRI to the cardiac cycle,

and we are getting slices at different parts of the cardiac cycle.

Other types? Gated CT, one that has never really translated into the clinical domain.

It's the impedance catheter and all of the data that I've shown you about the the actual data that

I've shown you about the pressure volume relationship was done with this impedance catheter.

Essentially it's very nice for the left ventricle. You can put the catheter through the aortic valve so you have an arterial access.

Into sort of the centerline of the left ventricle and the left ventricle.

Being essentially a volume of revolution, having sort of, um, um, rotational symmetry.

What you can do is you can inject a high frequency current.

From this electrode to this electrode, there is a certain conductivity that the blood has.

And then you can measure the voltage drop along the way of the catheter.

And you can make approximations that each between each one of these electrodes you have a cylinder.

Um, you can make then approximations about what that conductivity is over here,

what the length of this catheter or the delta L of the height of the of these

cylinders are and you can measure the volume details here are not important.

The point here is that we can do that. And.

We can then do experiments like this where we measure the pressure volume relationship over many cardiac cycles.

We are varying the preload of the heart, but as we vary the preload of the heart, the end systolic pressure long relationship essentially the same.

The way that the preload of the heart here was varied is you have a balloon catheter of the one that I actually passed around of that type.

You put it into the inferior or the superior vena cava. You blow it up a little bit and you're reducing thereby the flow that returns to the heart.

Okay. And then you can give drugs.

As I said over here. This is control.

Then you give a drug like dobutamine, which interferes overuse, which enhances the release of calcium in the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

You can go to a different. Okay.

I think that's it for today. We've talked now about the isolated ventricle.

We've have the input output relationship of that of that ventricle.

What we'll do on Tuesday when we meet at four 370 is the room number right.

It's in your notes. It's has been announced. So don't come here. If you come here you didn't pay attention.

So we knew immediately who did. But, uh, what we do is we will actually now think about the vasc, the pulmonary vasculature.

And then we would pull we put together the right ventricle,

the pulmonary vasculature and the left ventricle to then look at the whole input output relationship of the heart lung pumping unit.

And then we'll put that together with what we learned about the peripheral circulation.

So that's on Tuesday. Have a good weekend.

Let's see you then.

