[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Huge effects like. All right.

Good morning. All right.

Okay. From our perspective. One more cardiovascular lecture and spring break.

Boo boo said boo when?

Another lecture. Okay. Come tomorrow. All right.

So just a little bit of a roadmap. We're going to have two lectures to wrap up.

Uh, sort of the more physiology side of things, except for the, uh, uh, uh, electrophysiology pathology that Doctor Terrell talked about.

And then we'll start talking about ischemia, heart disease. And Doctor Stoltz, uh, will lecture about the clinical aspects.

Um, and then not the week following, but the Thursday 1 to 3 weeks from today,

we're going to have or you will have an opportunity to demonstrate your in-depth knowledge of the first half of the course.

Um, and we'll hand out some questions to orient you.

And, and before you go to get started. Problem set five, I think, is currently floating around in the ether.

Right. Is it five? Yeah. So, uh, we postponed this due date till we say Friday Saturday.

Sunday. Friday. Friday. Okay. Um, so take your time.

And we heard from you that, you know, there's a lot of midterms this time around.

So, um. Send it in.

There will be one more problem set that will be posting this time around, which will cover some of the material that will cover it.

Dave. What? The header, um, will cover that will be due before the midterm so that you have an opportunity to,

um, to go through some problems and now start to integrate a lot of things.

Okay. All right. Okay. So let me start about the control of the cardiovascular system.

We have to talk a little bit about the stresses that the cardiovascular system is under.

Right. This could have been any of you this morning. What does it show?

It shows the change in your blood pressure and the change in heart rate to a particular maneuver.

What is that maneuver? It's not waking up standing up.

It's standing up. So every time we say. So if we think of our mean arterial pressure, how do we calculate mean material pressure.

We have the systolic and diastolic pressure. So two thirds plus one third.

Systolic. So diastolic plus one third. Pulse pressure whatever that math is.

Right. So there has to be a yeah diastolic. So two thirds diastolic plus one third systolic okay.

We know that. So normally at heart level I mean actual pressure somewhere between 90 and 100mm of mercury.

Right. So this is the change in my natural blood pressure over here.

So we see when we stand up, we do see a drop of about 20mm of mercury measured at heart level.

Right now. If you're measuring it at heart level over here, you're thinking about what does it mean actual pressure at the level of the brain.

Right. You have another 30 or so centimeters. So this would be whatever this is minus rho g h.

Right. Because you're going against gravity. So did anybody.

Everybody ever. How many of you have gotten up from a supine or seated posture and first like, whoa, getting a little woozy right this morning.

All right. Good. Pretty much everybody. Right.

When you feel that, you kind of hold on to something, either you sit down or so do you hold on to something.

And after about ten, 15 seconds, you feel all right?

We're good. Right? Why is that? Because your control mechanisms kick in.

Right. If you get up too quickly, you might be a little bit hypovolemic.

Right? And blood pressure tanks transiently.

This could be any of you. This is nothing pathological. This is physiology, not pathology.

Right. But you see that within like so first of all, there is a little bit of an increase over here, right?

And that has to do with the fact that if you're lying down and you want to sit up, you're actually doing you have to pivot in your head, right?

You're doing a little bit of what you will see is about to maneuver. You tense your upper body.

When you tense your upper body, you make yourself stiff so that you can pivot in the hip.

That increases your blood pressure a little bit because you're squeezing on the large vessels, right?

You squeezing on anything that's in the abdomen and anything that's in the thorax.

And that makes your blood pressure, O2 blood pressure go up a little bit, but then you're standing and you release, right.

And now blood pressure tanks. Right.

But as blood pressure tanks, you see that there's a oh, excuse me, there's a concomitant and significant increase.

And heart rate pretty much immediate. Right, and s heart rate is shooting up.

Blood pressure's turning the corner. And once you're probably about 30 or so 40s in.

Blood pressure is fairly stable. And it's actually slightly higher than your supine baseline.

And you can think about this towards the end of this lecture, maybe at the beginning of the next lecture.

But you also see that at least over the short term.

The blood pressure. Homeostasis is maintained because you have a significant increase of about.

In this particular cohort of subjects, 10 to 15 beats per minute heart rate increase.

Right. And over the three minutes or so that we're showing over here, if you're just standing quietly.

Um, that heart rate will remain elevated.

As a matter of fact, if you if someone has this sensation of fainting or feels like dizzy upon standing up called orthostatic hypotension or esthetic

intolerance or postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome tachycardia meaning that if the harder it gets way too excessive.

So your heart rate must your heart must be, you know, very fast in order to maintain the blood pressure.

A simple test is done in the doctor's office to see whether the blood pressure in the heart rate are commensurate and are not excess blood pressure.

Not excessively low heart rate, not excessively high.

So this is just standing up every morning is a significant challenge.

And if we hadn't developed control mechanism to counteract the effects of gravity, you know,

there's a high chance that we would faint every time we have a change in posture.

Not good for a biped, right? Not would not be a good move by evolution.

So what happens? When you're lying down, you have gravity pulling in this direction, right?

But you don't have any gravity vector that aligns with the main body axis, which is this, right?

So no major hydrostatic gradients along the major body axis. But then once you actually start to move up in the gravitational field, right.

The gravity vector has a contribution along the main body axis.

Meaning that venous return is getting impaired and you're starting.

To pool blood in the dependent vasculature, meaning the vasculature below the level of the heart, there's a muscle contraction.

So the hydrostatic gradients along the major body axis begin to establish this immediate pooling of blood in the large veins.

Right. And these reflex responses are initiated.

And what do we mean by reflex responses? Heart rate.

Cardio contractility. Peripheral resistance. Venous tone.

So those are the major ones.

Now, if you're standing quietly for an extended period of time, the well, once you're upright, that the hydrostatic gradients are fully established.

All right. Blood is poured in the dependent veins. And blood plasma because of the increased hydrostatic pressure.

Transfer dates of the blood plasma are leaking into the interstitium.

If we talked about the starting forces across the capillary membrane,

if the hydrostatic pressure is too high, you're losing more fluid into the interstitium.

Right. All been on a plane.

If you're not moving your legs long enough, right? After a while, if you have a long duration of flight,

you're probably loosening your shoes a little bit because the shoes are feeling a little bit tight.

It also has to do with the fact that if you're not moving your legs, if you're just sitting there quietly,

that you have plasma leakage from the from the capillaries into the interstitium and you're sort of swelling up your,

your feet a little bit, not through edema at that point,

but enough for you to actually notice and for you to, to, to, uh, to loosen your shoes a little bit.

Reflex response is developed further and we are only focusing, you know, for this particular example.

At, um, the, uh, short term reflex responses later on,

maybe later in this lecture or in the next lecture, we talk about some of the longer term mechanisms.

Okay. Talking about standing up and how it is a challenge.

This is a subject A over here. The transient response that I've shown you in the other slide is cut off over here.

Unfortunately, we don't have that data, but this subject has probably been standing now for about a minute.

And then you see this recording over here, right?

When we talk about blood pressure homeostasis, we talk about mean arterial blood pressure that is usually maintained,

but there's significant fluctuations around it. We know that there's positivity with each cardiac beat.

Right. Because there's ejection and then there's elastic recoil and there's diastolic runoff.

We've also seen that there's respiratory variation right.

And there's also longer term fluctuations that have to do with with um control mechanisms that are more renal, uh related to the kidney.

But what you see over here is there's quite a little bit of bouncing around in this particular subject.

Right. Heart rate, you say? Well, this is tachycardic, right.

Cardiovascular system is under stress. It's probably a sinus tachycardia in this particular subject.

But you see that there's sort of these these dips. Right. And then these dips might be related to these higher excursions.

Right. But by and large again over the course of about these five minutes over here,

the blood pressure is maintained at or near a level of about a minute to a pressure of about 100, because heart rate is about 110 or so.

Right. Now, we wouldn't necessarily measure this kind of heart rate in in any of us as we're, you know, we'd be standing up.

This particular subject was a better subject, participated in a long duration bedrest study that was sponsored by NASA.

We were trying to figure out, you know, what happens to people that go to space for an extended period of time.

We can't switch off gravity on Earth. Not possible.

Would be cool, but we can't. So what do we do? We put these people to bed with a four degree head down tilt.

So the head is so that you compensated for the wedge shape of the, of the,

of the upper torso so that four degrees head down and they're just lying in bed for two weeks.

Right. And then we're looking at the renal and the neural humoral. Cardiovascular effects.

And then when they were down for for two weeks, we come in and say, all right, let's stand up.

Right. Many of them said, right, this particular one didn't.

Right. But this one here did. So cardiovascular control mechanism.

Use it or lose it. Right. In this in this, uh, um, uh, participants also in astronauts when they come back to space, one of the main,

uh, problems that they have is gravity is standing up in a normal gravitational, uh, environment here.

Subject B starts off similarly. Right.

And then is able to maintain blood pressure at the same level at an, at a, at, uh, increased heart rate.

But then what you see over here is it starts to decompensated, right?

Uh, blood pressure starts to roll off. And what you could see over here is that heart rate tries to sort of increase.

But it. Sort of maxes out, right?

And this is certainly not a mean arterial blood pressure of about 30 or 40mm of mercury at the level of the heart.

You know, subtract another 30cm or so or maybe another 15, 20mm of mercury.

You have absolutely no perfusion pressure, no arterial driving pressure left.

So when you actually see this person on a tilt table,

so they are strapped in on a table that can tilt up right when you see them on a tilt table, you say over here, it's like, how you doing, right?

And they're sort of like, um, all right. Right over here.

Oops. Where's my animation? Oh, it's gone away.

How's that possible? Oh, here it. This. So over here you see that the subject starts yawning, right?

You know, I don't know what that reflex is, but it's just you just see it and, you know, typical logic.

He said. Maybe they're trying to increase oxygen, right? Uh, and of course, if you, if you asking them over here, how are you doing?

So I can feel a little lightheaded. At this point.

If you look at the subject, the subject looks very pale. All of a sudden it's like they turn white.

Then you look at them, it's like, Holy [INAUDIBLE], right? It's like, I haven't seen anyone so white.

Right. And they report, it's like, look. Peripheral vision.

It's like I'm fainting here, right? I'm going.

And they say the impending loss of of of consciousness.

Right. So they're aware of the fact that they're sort of like that, that they're zoning out.

And the interesting thing here, right, is, of course, if you keep them upright, very dangerous.

Very dangerous because they are fainting,

they are losing consciousness and they are losing consciousness because inadequate blood supply to the brain.

The interesting thing is the moment that you turn them back, right?

You return them to the horizontal. They pop right back.

Right? Because now all of that blood that is pooled in the dependent vasculature, right.

You allow to simply come back, you have now a massive increase, an immediate increase in venous return.

Right. The heart fills, it pumps. Right.

And the gravitation gradients are abolished.

And the the the subject pops right back. All right, so someone is painting.

Dropping down to the ground. Protective mechanism.

Raise the legs up. Right. To increase the venous return from the dependent vasculature.

From the legs into the thorax to increase venous return.

If it's a hypo, it's a cause of hypokalemia.

Right. Because there's not enough venous return. They will come right back.

Point is also the hard, obviously not empty.

You know, when people faint, right? You still have cardiac output, but the cardiac output is inadequate to perfused the brain.

Yeah. Yes.

The other patient didn't faint. No. Subject calling.

Did you want to say? Yeah.

Does. Yeah. Thank you.

Okay. So gravity is a significant challenge to venous return, right?

Our quadruped you know friends over here for them we have about 70% of blood resides above the level of the heart.

So the heart pumps it pumps essentially blood.

A lot of the blood up above the level of the heart. Venous return is passively aided by gravity.

For us, about 70% of our blood is below the level of the heart.

Right? So for us, walking, running, jumping, whatever we want to do in gravity, being a biped is a significant challenge.

And we have to ensure that in evolution has had to help us build mechanisms that allow us to bring the blood back to the heart.

So. If we think that we are challenged, right?

What about this guy? That's a significant distance from the heart to the head.

Right. And so we'll come back to the giraffe at the end of the lecture and see what spatial mechanisms they have developed.

But suffice it to say that one of the things I've already indicated over here is I'll show you at the end of the lecture,

if you look across the mammalian species mean arterial pressure at the level of the heart,

whether it's a pigmy mouse or it's whatever is the largest mammal of choice, about 100mm of mercury.

Right. The fact that the giraffe has a natural pressure at the level of the of the aorta here, right, of 250mm of mercury,

is already indicative that they actually have to overcome quite a bit of, um, hydrostatic gradient from the heart to the brain.

Okay. What do we put over here?

Right. Well the Vale. I would like to know the mean actual blood pressure at the whale.

I don't know anybody who has categorized the whale. Right, but I would love to see.

But the profile is different. Right. Because the veil, you actually have an external pressure.

Right? So depending on. So you have to equilibrate that pressure.

But it's a very good question I would love to know. Yeah. So yeah.

So it's not the T-Rex, but. It's this guy, and this is a picture that is taken from a publication that was, I think,

in Scientific American, and it was an exhibit in the National History Museum in New York.

And it um. Kicked loose.

The proverbial should show a shitstorm right amongst paleontologists.

Why? Why do you think that this depiction here made, you know, the paleontologists blood boil?

Sorry. Yeah, exactly. Did they ever did. They did. Do they have the biomechanics to even stand on their hind limbs?

Right. These things weigh tons, right?

So a lot of people were thinking after they saw this, it's like, okay, the hypothesis,

auxiliary hearts along the level of the neck in order to get the blood up to like 60m, right.

But truth be told, you know, the and the analysis of the articulations, you know,

both in the neck but also in the, in, in the hipbone suggests that they would never stand on their hind limbs.

They would not be able to support the weight on the hamstrings.

That is actually this is not a this is an, uh, herbivore, and that the long neck was actually to go horizontally into brush rather than to going up.

Doesn't mean that they cannot lift their head and will come back to the, to the, uh, to the giraffe.

And that that might still be a significant challenge to the cardiovascular system.

But standing on their hind limbs and having the head so much higher above the level of the neck, probably not gonna did probably didn't happen.

But significant challenge to the cardiovascular system.

Okay. So we have challenges that you can break down by the time scale.

You can break down by severity. We said seconds to minutes standing up.

You eat a big meal. What happens to your blood flow? Redirect it to your gut.

Right? You're you. You run for the bus, you wake up in the morning.

You can compound this if you want. Right? You wake up in the morning, you realize you're late for your 2090 exam.

You jump out of bed, and then you realize that the M2 is about to leave Vanderbilt Hall.

Right now you have to run after the bus. Who can? All of you can do this. All of you know, all within seconds, two minutes.

Right. So the dynamic range of what the cardiovascular system has to accommodate is quite significant hours.

Today's extreme heat. Right. Fluid deprivation.

You go to space. Right.

All of a sudden, you in zero gravity over here, right at the beginning of space travel, of human space, uh, of people flying into space.

There was significant, um, discussions about whether we would even be able to survive.

The lack of gravity for an organism that has always evolved in the presence of gravity, right?

Obviously we know now. We know better now, right? Minutes to hours.

Also this was our immune cells. Fevers blood loss.

Right. Myocardial infarction. Our lady from the very first lecture.

Right. This happens over two minutes. Two hours. Then we have hours to days, weeks to months.

I think I just changed this. We had long duration spaceflight in your, in your, um, in your slides.

But I took that out and put hypertension in there just because also to look at some of the things that are coming.

Right. If you are hypertensive for an extended period of time,

that puts additional stress onto your cardiovascular system over long duration, uh, and that can lead to remodeling of the heart.

You engage in marathon training or you go to high altitude training, right?

All of these things the cardiovascular system responds to.

Main tasks of the cardiovascular system. We had that in this first or second lecture, right.

Zina on. Refuse the central nervous system with blood.

I provide oxygen to the central nervous system, meaning get blood to the brain.

Right. And then if you can no longer do that.

You drop down and the effort, or the at least one implication of that is potentially to return to increase.

Well, it's talk about these these other, um, secondary mechanisms.

All of you are familiar with fixed method of, uh, of of, um, computing cardiac output.

You've seen it once, you've seen it twice, you've seen it three times. You will see it again.

Not today. Maybe three weeks from today.

All right, so take a look. Make sure that you know how to compute cardiac output.

How you compute, uh, pulmonary blood flow.

Cardiac output. Very significant. Um important variable in, in physiology but also in diagnostics.

And what was also shown in the second lecture of the first lecture is that if your workload goes up.

Right. The oxygen consumption that you see over here is met, typically with a concomitant increase in cardiac output.

So perfusion limited state of the cardiovascular system meaning that cardiac output.

Increase in cardiac output is, but by and large meets our metabolic demand rather than increased oxygen extraction from hemoglobin.

Now that can happen. It does happen, but by first order over a wide range, it's actually the increase in cardiac output,

which means that the dynamic range of what the cardiovascular system can produce in terms of output

is really one of the limiting steps in our ability to meet the demand of the rest of the body.

He has a different, uh. Uh, depiction. Again, oxygen uptake, um, is a measure of your exercise intensity.

And we all have a maximum VO2, meaning that it's the maximum oxygen uptake that we can have.

And that's in athletes. It's a very important metric to measure.

What is the VO2 max. Right. And how can we actually bring that up in what you can see over here each at each level of exercise.

You have a rough distribution of where is your blood going. Where is your cardiac output going.

Right. This here is muscle the dark black. Over here we have the viscera.

We have the brain and the heart and we have the skin.

So as you dial up your, your your exercise intensity, obviously a lot more going to the exercising muscle.

That's where you need the oxygen. That's where you need the ATP.

That's where CO2 is being generated. And that's where CO2 needs to be washed out of.

Right. So as you increase cardiac output fractionally, a lot more is going to the muscle.

Right. Viscera. You see that? It is actually, you know, going down a little bit.

Fractionally. The blood flow to the heart into the brain is going down.

But in absolute terms, it's staying constant throughout the entire period,

which tells you that the cardiovascular system is preserving a certain amount of cardiac output,

blood flow to go to the heart itself and to the, um, to the, um, to the brain.

Now, skin going, you know, staying constant a little bit and then going up.

Why? Thermoregulation. Right. Vasodilation and thermoregulation.

Because what you're doing over here, generating a lot of friction, generate a lot of cross-bred cycling between actin and myosin.

And you're generating a lot of heat. That heat needs to dissipate.

Okay, so we're preserving the blood flow to the heart and to the brain, even when other parts of the body are crying out for more blood flow.

Right? And this is also a, uh, a diagram that we've shown in the very first lectures.

And when I showed this diagram in the second lecture, I said, let's think of the heart either as a source of pressure or as a source of current.

Right. And I was standing exactly over here and I said, we have two perspectives that we will at times use interchangeably.

We are thinking of the heart as a current source. Then we're thinking about cardiac output, right?

How much output is the heart producing. That's our cardiac output venous return curve analysis.

Right. But will also switch over and say what is blood pressure doing.

And one thing that I've said over here is, is we have these parallel pathways.

That all draw blood from the aorta. Right.

You can go into these different direction. And we have these pre capillary sphincter muscles over here indicated by these crosses.

Right. These are the vascular resistances.

These large or significant vascular resistances can modulate the blood flow to the individual vascular territories.

Now, if the heart. If you think of the heart as a current source, then you say the heart is giving out five liters per minute, right?

And you're starting to exercise. And your vascular territory through the legs.

Says, well, if I'm exercising, I need more blood flow. As you will see, if I'm exercising, I'm actually producing more CO2.

CO2 is a vasodilator. So the mere fact that you're generating more CO2 means that that resistance is actually going down.

You're having more flow into the legs.

But if you're giving out a constant flow over here, more flow going here means that you're stealing flow from some of these other pathways.

Is that clear? If this flow is constant and you're drawing more flow through here, less flow is available through these other parallel pathways.

Right. So that's the view of cardiac output. Obviously not good right.

Because we don't want to exercise but lose our perfusion to our brain as we've seen.

The other view is what if the heart and the vascular system interacts in such a manner that pressure.

Is more or less constant over here. Right.

If I adjust things in the background and I say, look, I don't know what the demand is, and I see that the demand is going up.

So let me crank up rate a little bit.

Let me crank up the resistance a little bit in some of the vascular territories so that blood pressure stays constant.

Blood pressure at the level of the heart over here stays constant.

Then if this territory needs more flow, it can decrease the resistance.

Right. But because this pressure stays approximately constant, it will get more flow, but not at the expense of the other.

Territories because the perfusion pressure you recall defined as upstream pressure minus the downstream pressure states pretty much the same.

Right? So unless this territory over here, this territory over here changes its resistance as well.

It should not be affected by the flow that's going through the legs, the extremities.

Right. So that's where we're now switching the view a little bit.

When we talk about the control of the cardiovascular system, we will see that this pressure sensors that there is at the level of the heart and

at the level of the neck where we're talking about blood pressure homeostasis,

we're not so much talking about cardiac output homeostasis.

Cardiac output is not really a controlled variable, but blood pressure is.

And their blood pressure. Cardiac output is very important, right?

Because some of the effective mechanisms of keeping blood pressure constant have to do with flow control,

might have to do with, to do with with the output of the cardio valve, the heart lung pumping unit.

Right. But we're now making that switch. We say what is happening to blood pressure under this, this, this or this scenario?

And how can we how does the heart lung pumping unit, how does the peripheral circulation react to that.

Okay. So then you. So yes it does.

Right. So I said in the first. Sorry. No.

So in the first view, if it were constant, it would be bad, right?

Hence the motivation and the design principles that we'll talk about that keep blood pressure constant.

Right. And cardiac output being one of the um it's not a mechanism, but it's, it's, it's, it's a,

it's a variable that is affected by the control mechanisms in order to keep blood pressure constant.

Okay. This makes sense. All right. So, as I already said, what are our available controls?

Of course, the pump function itself. And that has to do with rate and contractility.

And both of them relate through our cardiac output curve analysis to the output that the heart can give out.

Right. But of course, we know that the output that the cardiac,

that the cardiac output proper is determined by the joint function of the heart lung pumping unit and the peripheral circulation.

Right. It's that intersection point of the cardiac output curve and the venous return curve.

We have total and local resistance. Excuse me?

To redirect flow. To meet regional demands. So when we exercise.

Right. Of course, the as I mentioned, the the the resistance to the exercising muscles goes it goes down.

Right. But the resistance to other territories might go up.

And this way you do end up redirecting flow preferentially to the exercising muscles.

Right. So there might be a disconnect as we will see between what the local.

All the regulatory mechanisms, as we would call them do.

And what sort of more the global control strategy is. So resistance.

And then of course we have intravascular descending pressure or venous tone in the fluid balance.

That is a very important regulatory mechanism. Right.

So the storage of blood on these large capacitance vessels in the systemic circulation.

We already said that with a little bit of modulation of the filling status of the venous vessels, we can actually more mobilize quite a bit of volume,

move it from the zero pressure filling volume to the descending volume, and bring it, so to speak, back into the circulation.

Have it be part of the descending volume, then the um.

Um. The. A zero pressure feeling for.

As I said, we sort of. Divide the action or the mechanism of control into what we call intrinsic.

What we mean by that intrinsic to the vascular territory.

Right. Control. And we also call that auto regulation where the vascular territories have mechanisms to regulate their own blood supply.

Or the extrinsic control, and that is the neuro humoral mechanisms that go to the brain,

that have sensors in various parts of the body that integrate information from a variety of sources and thereby look after the global blood pressure,

homeostatic, um, uh, ability, uh, to maintain that homeostasis.

Okay. So. We will talk.

They mostly about auto regulation. We will talk about X transit control a little bit.

So but first let's talk about auto regulation and intrinsic.

We've looked at this and we said we are boiling all of cardiovascular, um,

histology, vascular histology, not cardiovascular histology into a single slide.

But we said we have an intima, a media advantage. That's it. Right?

End of story. Everything else, you know, Bobby taught you and.

And Rick. If he's still teaching pathology. Right?

But this is it, right?

But what we will see in a few slides is, as you probably know, is these are not necessarily passive structures, especially the intima.

Right. We have a layer of endothelial cells. And that endothelium is in direct contact with blood.

Right. And it's a sensing organ. And it can sense um shear stress.

It can respond of course biochemically to things that are rolling around like leukocytes.

Right. It is an entry point. It can be a point of injury, as we will see in Doctor Stewart's lectures on ischemia, heart disease and atherosclerosis.

It can be an entry point of all sorts of, of, of getting into here and depositing.

Right. But for us here right now, as we think of the endothelial layer as a sensing layer as we will see.

But um, but then the tunica media over here is where we have the vascular smooth muscle.

Right. And that is what provides us both on the arterial side and on the venous side, with the ability to constrict and to relax.

To increase the resistance or to decrease the resistance. To decrease the filling state, or to increase the filling state of the veins right,

and thereby modulate the resistance to blood flow and modulate the capacitance state of the of the vasculature.

Then we have the advantage for structural support. So we talked about the, um.

Uh, the cardiac myocytes and the cellular machinery that leads to, um, uh, actin myosin cross cycling.

That creates tensions. The smooth muscles have a slightly different structure.

They have more of a spindly structure, but they also act similar to the cardiac muscle cells as a sensation.

We made that point in in In the Heart as a pump lecture where we say that functionally the myocardium acts like a network,

a tightly coupled network, right, where information can really flow very, very easily from one cell to another here.

It is biochemical information in terms of, you know, calcium and, and, uh,

currents that, uh, give rise to the electrophysiology that Doctor Tatro talked about.

We call it smooth muscle because in a micro microscopy and electron microscopy,

you do not see the nice banding structure that we have in, in the cardiac myocytes, in the skeletal,

uh, muscles where you have the actin myosin parallel arrangement right here is really more a,

um, uh, uh, somewhat crisscross arrangement of the contractile elements.

And so you don't have that banding structure over here, hence smooth, because it doesn't look as structured.

Right. If it's in the relaxed states it's somewhat elongated. If it's a contract state it contracts in multiple dimensions.

But this spindly structure over here and the the sort of wrap around structure around these

hollow organs in the body means that you're constricting and you're usually decreasing the,

um, the luminal diameter of, um, of the vessel of the, of the tubular structure that you're in.

They come in two types single unit visceral type.

And you can read this tied mechanical electrical coupling. That's true for all of them right.

I talked about this sensation. They line all the hollow organs of the of of the of the body, gut, bladder, uterus, blood vessels and so on.

They also have the ability of other ethnicities.

So we talked about the other ethnicity, you know, ad nauseum at the, you know, phase, phase four of, uh,

of the cardiac action potential, uh, the action potential frequency relates to the stretch, as we will see in the next slide.

And there's multi unit type where the independent units,

individually innervated sphincters and radial muscles of the I for example no tonic contraction as we will have over here.

Tonic construction means that we have a baseline tension right.

Without any influences you still have a baseline tension that is being provided.

Uh and these are not responsive to stress. So what we are talking about is mostly these ones over.

We'll talk a little bit, not in great detail about the smooth muscle.

We will talk about sympathetic parasympathetic nervous system and how they actually relate to, uh,

constriction and, and dilation of, of the eye, but not necessarily about the multi type units over here.

So what I'm showing you here is a response to stretch.

So here what we're doing is we're taking a smooth muscle unit.

Right. And and rather than doing what we did for the myocardial cells, we say, all right,

let us stimulate the cell at a different frequency and see how it actually contracts.

Here what we're doing is we're actually stretching it a little bit. Right.

So we are increasing the tension and we will see what is the action potential firing actually doing.

So we're doing that. Excuse me. You're doing the reverse. Here is essentially the force that's being generated and that you see over here.

And then on on the left side over here is the action potential, um, that we can measure in terms of the voltage right now,

as we stretch, the mean of the tension that we measure is going up and up and up, this is what we impose.

This is our experiment with stretch. Measure the action potential, stretch a little more.

Measure the action potential.

What you see over here is as you stretch, as you increase the force, you see that the action potential frequency of of firing is actually going up.

So there's mechanical reception that's happening at the level of the cellular machinery that is at the vascular smooth muscle,

and that is interesting and important for the the structures of vascular resistance,

for example, or the veins, the storage vessels, so that if you actually have increased, um.

Stretch. The vessels might respond with an increase in action.

Potential firing. The contract mechanisms.

Don't want to dwell too much on it, but we also have acting myosin interaction and that leads to contraction.

But this interest it is also triggered by intracellular calcium calcium induced calcium release.

However the side of control is the myosin head. That's in contrast to skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle, and the dynamics is slow.

Right. We've all had belly pain, right? And there might be waves, sort of peristaltic waves of pain that's coming.

And it's not like it's coming and you're immediately it's going to feel a little bit of a twitch.

But usually they come on right. And then they intensify.

And then when the wave disappears, it sort of takes a long time for it sort of disappeared.

And that has to do with with with sort of smooth muscle construction and,

and the cellular machinery that gives rise to these slow wave oscillations or the slow wave,

which on the order of uh, tens of seconds rather than on the order of, uh, you know, with within the cardiac beat.

So calcium induced calcium release exactly the same. Right.

So we'll see in one of the next slides voltage gated ion channels. We have other responsive channels that allow calcium to come in.

Sarcoplasmic reticulum still our store of calcium intracellular.

But then the downstream machinery is quite different from what we've learned for the cardiac side.

So here once released calcium binds to a complex called CL modulus.

Right. And once this kind of large calcium can modulate complex is um uh is formed.

It is it interacts with inactive myosin light change kinase over here is called milk.

And once that is activated it allows the um light chains in myosin heads to increase its myosin ATPase activity.

And you have that cross bridge cycle. Right now.

Like in the in the cardiac muscle, the, um, the cycle continues in the presence of calcium, right?

Once the calcium is withdrawn again through the sarcoplasmic reticulum, your forceful labrum.

I'm burning. Jessica. Right. The you're removing the substrate for the calcium core module in mice.

And light chain kinase complex and relaxation takes.

Okay. So you can look at these details a little bit.

And as I said, there are mechanisms by which different mechanisms by which you can activate the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

We've talked about the voltage gated ion channels that we have over here.

So the membrane depolarization opens. Uh, the voltage uh, voltage gated ion channels.

Calcium comes in calcium induced calcium release. But you can also go through second messenger systems where you have, uh, Noor,

uh, adrenaline, uh, endothelium angiotensin two that we will talk about.

Uh, next lecture bind to membrane uh receptors and activate the second messenger system that will then also act on the sarcoplasmic.

Um. And we also have have these um,

receptor operated calcium channels over here where you have an agonist that needs to bind and it's not a voltage gated ion channel,

but you have an agonist that binds that open up the channel. Calcium comes in, calcium is released.

Ultimately calcium taken up again. Okay.

Um, once we have the calcium in, we have have to get the calcium out again.

And that is very similar to what we have in the, um, in the, um.

Cardiac myocytes. So what's the action? This is in your notes.

Um, in your in your in your, uh uh uh uh, notes on on cardiovascular control.

We already talked about stretch. We stretch the vascular smooth, smooth muscle.

This stretch activated calcium channels are being opened, and it leads to an increase in the, um.

In the, uh. Uh. Action potential frequency that increase in action potential frequency firing leads to a contraction.

Right. So the stretch opens the channels allowing calcium to enter.

You have crunch with cost per second. So you can have it. You can think of it as a dilation right.

How does the muscle how does the vessel responds. It responds by contraction.

Right. If there is a reason to actually be stretched well it'll try to come back or regulation.

Right. What you're trying to do is you're locally regulating to the needs of, of of, of the vascular territory, membrane depolarization.

Pretty straightforward. And then we have various various agonists over here.

So norepinephrine we'll talk about more uh is an agonist that leads to constriction.

Same with angiotensin two endothelium acetylcholine.

And these are these, um. Um, uh, channel pathways that relate to the, um.

Uh, these various, uh, agonists that we have over here.

But we also have receptors that in.

Various doses or in in certain doses can actually lead to relaxation.

So epinephrine. In low dose can actually lead to relaxation.

And as we'll see in some of the slides later on in high dose, it can actually lead.

Constriction. Now some of us might be carrying EpiPens around.

Right? Because you might have an allergy to peanuts. You might have allergy to something.

Right. I had to carry an EpiPen for a while.

They still haven't figured out what it was, but, you know, I usually carry it when I'm going on long duration flights.

Just. I've never had to use it. Right. You think that the dose in an EpiPen is a low dose?

What's a high dose of epi? What do you think? I don't right?

Why do you give? Why do you. Why do you give an EpiPen? So what is it?

It's. It's an allergic reaction to something, right?

Alexei. Exactly right.

So it's sort of anaphylactic shock. You don't want to want to prevent someone from going into anaphylactic shock.

Shock? Meaning? Just meaning very, very low. Dangerously low blood pressure.

Right. And it's true that if you have a massive, um.

Uh, response, massive allergic reaction,

it can lead to all sorts of stuff getting into your bloodstream being spilled over that are potent vasodilators, right?

And your blood pressure's tanking. So when you stab yourself with an EpiPen, you don't want to be in the regime of epinephrine.

That leads to further vasodilation. You want to be in a regime which is usually a high dose regime of epinephrine,

that when it becomes a very powerful vasodilator of a constricted, sorry, vasoconstrictor.

And so it turns out that epinephrine has both affinity at low dose for beta two receptors in the vasculature,

which is a dilator, but also at high dose for alpha receptors, which we will see is important because of constrict.

So EpiPens high dose of epinephrine.

And then we will talk about it from that tragic peptide later on.

But also uh, in a few slides about oxygen itself.

Right. So low tension of oxygen sense at the level of the endothelium.

Right. Makes sense that we want to relax. Relaxation means that we dilate.

Right. If our vascular if our territory senses low oxygen, what do we want to do?

We want to bring in more oxygen. How do we want to bring. How do we bring more oxygen?

What ways are dilating. So we're redirecting blood flow to our vascular territory.

Right. Likewise, what if CO2 is high?

Well, one way to get CO2 high is by actually exercising.

Right. Or if we have inadequate blood flow to the target organ, let's say we actually cranking out something over here.

It could be muscular activity. It could be some metabolic action.

Right. We're increasing CO2. But for some reason the rest of the body is giving is not giving us more blood flow.

That's CO2 in and of itself, is a potent vasodilator that leads to relaxation and therefore increase in blood flow to the vascular territory.

Right. Nitric oxide. We'll also talk about mechanisms are here.

Again sensing mechanism at the level of the intima over here, and action at the level of the vascular smooth muscle of the um.

Of the of the media.

So here's a couple of interesting experiments, because for a while we didn't we didn't know, um, what the how the how the, the vessels respond.

So we have our vessel over here that we took out of an animal. Right.

We put it into a flow, um, channel over here.

We hook it up. Um, and what we can measure is the diameter over here.

And we can measure the internal pressure IP over here.

That's the internal pressure at some representative point, right.

While keeping the upstream pressure and the downstream pressure pretty much the same.

Meaning that we can actually change the stretch of the vessel.

While keeping the perfusion pressure constant, meaning the flow is not changed.

Perfusion pressure constant. Or we can titrate in such a way that the perfusion pressure and the flow stays the same, but the stretch can change.

So if this were a passive tube without anything, right, without any control, without any active mechanism.

If we increase the diameter. We decrease the resistance.

To decrease the resistance. Right for the same perfusion pressure, we should increase the flow.

So what do we do over here? We change in a stepwise manner.

The internal pressure, the outside pressure stays the same.

So the trends. Mural pressure inside pressure minus outside pressure.

Right is going up. So the distension here is going up.

If it were passive two. Right. The diameter should be going up.

Does that make sense? But what is happening to the diameter?

Going down. But even though the internal. Even though trans mural pressure is higher.

The diameter is going down, which means it can be a passive tool. Right.

And what we have over here is various, um.

Uh, measurement series. We say with the endothelium intact.

Right. We exactly reproduce. This mechanism.

Meaning, and the seal is intact. The whole vessel is intact.

We increase the aluminum pressure, we increase the trans mural pressure.

But the diameter is going down. Right?

Yeah. Well, you can do this by boat by bringing this guy up.

Right. By bringing this guy down. So you would have. Or by keeping this one constant, you can bring this one up.

You can actually bring this pressure up. So you have multiple, uh, levers that you can use over here.

You can also just increase the reservoir over here.

Right. Exactly right.

That's what we're trying to figure out. Right. That is the big mystery before the coffee.

Right. But. You're coming down, right?

So you have the trans mural pressure that's going up. And if it were a passive two.

The diameter would be going up. Now the diameter is going down right.

Does it have anything to do with endothelium? We said that the endothelium is sensing.

Right. We continued the vessel of the endothelium, meaning that we can go in and we can scrape out the endothelium.

No more endothelium. Right. And that is endothelium denuded.

And you see, it's exactly the same thing. But then if you give nitric oxide.

Which is an agent that interferes with the vascular smooth muscle constriction.

You see, at that point, we getting into what is called a pressure passive state, meaning the higher the transcription pressure, the higher.

Uh, so at this level here, clearly something that's happening at the level of the vascular smooth muscle.

And it relates back to the what I showed before you stretch the vessel your or you, you you increase the stress on the vessel, the vessel.

There's a smooth muscle response by an increase in the firing frequency.

Okay, an increase in the firing frequency,

that it creates more active tension and therefore counteracts the tendency to

wanting to dilate the vessels because of the increase in transmitted pressure.

Yeah. We increasing the transmission pressure in this one?

Not the perfusion pressure. So you can keep the.

You can keep. Let's say we have this right. So you can increase the trend small pressure by keeping the the the, um.

The perfusion pressure pretty much the same.

Or you can adjust the perfusion pressure if you want to keep the flow the same by still making the vessel more dilated.

So these are independent variables. But we're getting to the perfusion pressure now.

So here it's the trans mural pressure that is being manipulated.

But what if we actually measure? If we increase the.

Perfusion pressure. Right here we measure the delta P is the upstream pressure minus the downstream pressure.

Perfusion pressure IP is still the internal pressure.

And here what we're doing is we're doing the opposite. We're actually changing the perfusion pressure by changing the height of the reservoirs.

Right. But in such a way that the internal pressure doesn't change.

And what you see over here is the diameter is actually going up more or less proportionally with the increase in the, um, perfusion pressure.

Right. And when we do this, we see this over here that in the endothelium intact as we actually increasing the

flow and essentially the shear stress that is being sensed by the endothelial cell.

Right. We see that the diameter is actually going up, tending towards a reduction in the force that's acting on the endothelial cells.

But what happens if we take the endothelium out? Nothing.

Right. We are completely abolishing that response. Meaning that the endothelium here has a very important sensing function.

And that sensing function is transduced to the smooth muscle.

Right, which is completely abolished when we actually take the endothelium out.

This used to be called the vascular derived relaxation factor.

For a long time we didn't know what it is, but now we know what we've known for a long time now that it is actually nitric oxide.

And when I was in your seats and I was taking pathology the late 90s, that's when the Nobel Prize was given for the identification of nitric oxide.

It's available dilator. Okay.

So the endothelium responds to shear stress, right?

And the vascular smooth muscle can also respond to stretch and distension.

Let me see. Um. Uh.

Let's break here. We'll come back, we finish off auto regulation and we'll start with expensive control.

Okay. 12.

Oh. Exactly.

Literally. All right.

So there were a bunch of questions about this experiment. So what we'll do is we'll post the paper on, on um, on canvas so that you can take a look.

Um, but let me let me summarize this once more. What this experiment was about is to dissect two mechanisms.

Of auto regulation. The field of auto regulation.

This, as we saw from the tables that I showed you, there's many mechanisms that can lead to constriction.

There's many mechanisms that can lead to vascular relaxation.

Right. I don't think anybody knows how these mechanisms, if they're all happening at the same time, is integrated.

People can do computer models of it. If you make a big computer model or something at this complex, you have a lot of degrees of freedom.

You have to guess a lot of parameters. You can, but you can write down rate equations.

You can write on differential equations. You can figure out what comes out at the end.

Right. Worthwhile exercise however what how as we will also see at the global mechanism is the intrinsic extrinsic mechanism,

how information is ultimately integrated across these different mechanisms,

and how the body ultimately decides whether to relax the vessel or to construct a vessel.

I don't think that we have any clue about. Right. But there are a few guiding principles.

If the metabolic need of the vascular territory is going up, it usually dilates.

Right. If. If, uh, if there's global influence.

Right. Um, you know, that's a in a territory that that might not have an increased metabolic demand.

Usually the global, uh, effect, you know, winds. Let me go through this again over here.

What this experiment is trying to do is trying to dissect mechanisms.

Right? It doesn't tell us how they interact, how they integrate. But the key message,

why I included this in our presentation today is to say that there are mechanisms that occur

purely at the level of the vascular smooth muscle that are independent of the endothelium.

As we've seen in the table over here. Right.

These are these are mechanisms here and and and transmitters and and and agents that act directly at the level of the vascular smooth muscle.

We're not telling you where they're coming from. Right there coming.

Sort of some of this like epinephrine, norepinephrine can come from somewhere else, right?

They're not synthesized at the level of the vascular smooth muscle, but the vascular muscle is responding to its biochemical and mechanical milieu.

Is the environment right? So coming back to here.

If this were a passive tube and we change the distension state, right, the resistance would go down, right.

Or let's say this way, if we increase the transmission pressure,

the increase in transmission pressure of a passive floppy rubber tube means that the diameter is going up.

We agree with that, right? You blow up a balloon, you increase the internal pressure, you know?

And compared to the outside pressure, transfer pressure is going up. Balloon is expanding.

Right. What we're showing over here is that you increase the internal pressure.

Resistance as the diameter is going down. Order.

For that to happen, they have to be some mechanisms in the smooth muscle that overcomes,

not just overcomes that, that that tendency to extend, but actually actively constricts.

Right. The question here was, is this at the level of the endothelium that this happens?

Is this an endothelial dependent mechanism or is it an endothelial independent mechanism?

The answer is it is endothelial independent because whether the endothelium is intact.

Well, we've taken the endothelium out. We just rip it out.

Right. Doesn't matter. The response is the same.

However, if we interfere with the act in myosin prosperous cycling of the vascular smooth muscle,

then an increase in the intra aluminum pressure in the transmitted pressure leads to an increase in the diameter.

That's all that. This. Um, is supposed to convey.

All right. Here. What we said is we're keeping the we're having a.

Elaborate experimental setup where we can keep the the in the intra luminal pressure, the intramural pressure constant.

We're not adding any stress in terms of radial distension, right?

But we're increasing the perfusion pressure. Now in a passive floppy tube.

If flat passive rubber tube. Right. We keep the diameter constant.

We're just pushing more flow through per unit time or more volume through per unit time.

It should not change the diameter. Right. What changes the diameter in a floppy tube is inside pressure, minus outside pressure.

And that is being held constant here artificially. Right.

One second. And so. What we would expect to see in a passive troop is nothing in the in terms of the diameter.

Right. But what we do see is a relaxation, meaning an increase in the diameter.

Right. And is this endothelium dependent or independent?

It is endothelium dependent. The moment that we take the endothelium out.

Right. We're going back to something that is independent of the pressure gradient.

Upstream pressure. Minus downstream pressure. Right. So the purpose of this slide was to demonstrate that in addition to sensing that

might happen at the level of the end of the level of the smooth muscle cell.

There is sensing at the level of the endothelium that gets then transduced to the vascular smooth muscle and can lead to a relaxation.

Okay, how these mechanisms interact.

How they integrate. Right.

Because in the body, if you have an increase in the upstream pressure, you probably also see an increase in the trans neural pressure.

How do these interact. Where do you actually end up. We don't know.

Right? So I'm not telling you how the mechanism of the previous slide supersedes or is secondary to the mechanism in this slide.

I'm not telling you that. I'm only telling you that there are different sensing mechanisms that can lead to dilation or to contraction.

And some of them are endothelium dependent. Others are endothelium independent.

All right then you. We can look at that in the paper.

It's not relevant to the main message that I want to convey. Right.

You can do that. And that's the experimental method section of the paper.

So. We can look at the board and we can, we can, we can walk that through.

It's possible. Let's take that. Okay. All right.

So. How does this integrate.

And again, I'm telling you sort of vignettes of what happens in this condition, what happens in that condition.

Because there's no grand unified theory. Right. But there are certain things that we want to think through.

If there's increase in metabolic demand, we expect the blood flow to that territory to go up.

Right. And there are certain dynamic responses that we can we can talk about.

We talked about sort of takes about three to 30s.

It's a comparatively slow process. So if we isolate the hind limb of a dog, as in this experiment, and we look at the perfusion pressure over here.

Right. This is the perfusion pressure over here.

Let's say we operate usually at this point over here is close to 100mm of mercury of the perfusion pressure.

And then we have a step change. In the perfusion pressure.

Right. So we move. From, let's say 90 ish millimeters or whatever.

This is this. Yeah, 90mm of mercury. Right.

And we do a step change in the perfusion pressure and hold that constant.

All right. What will happen is that.

Initially, you'll see a step change in the flow. Right.

You're increasing the upstream pressure or you're increasing the perfusion pressure in at time zero.

Let's do it this way. So this is time over here.

This is perfusion pressure.

Right. We're sitting somewhere around 90mm of mercury.

Right. And then at time t zero over here we go up to one 20mm of mercury.

And we keep this constant. Right.

If this were a passive tube. Right. Our flow.

Would increase. The first order increasing the perfusion pressure.

Right. We're pushing more flow through assuming that the resistance is constant.

Right. And that's what we see over here is that transiently the flow will go up.

But if we wait our 20 to 30s.

We will actually see that the flow will come back down.

There's an active mechanism. That as you increase.

The perfusion pressure. The vessels will constrict and come back to a level in terms of blood flow, very close.

To what? It's the baseline state over here. Right.

Likewise, if you go up and up and up. In your initial in your initial step response.

Right. You increase the transient response.

But it comes back down slowly over the course of 20 to 30s who give the the the smooth muscle enough time, right?

It constricts up until a point where it can no longer constrict any further.

Right. So you're staying very close to the blood flow.

And he anomalies by millimeters per minute per 100 gram of tissue.

Because you want to normalize it by how much tissue is actually being perfused by this.

Right. And even though you have a transient response where the flow goes up over the course of your 3040,

2030 40s, the vascular smooth muscle kicks in and your flow comes back down.

Right up until a point when you're maximally constricted, you can constrict anymore.

Right. On average, we have many parallel pathways. And you're going into a state that is called pressure passive.

Meaning at this point you would have a constant slope over here that any further increase.

In the in the in the perfusion pressure would lead to a concomitant increase in.

Uh, blood flow to the territory. Likewise, if you go the opposite direction, you decrease.

Now you're going this way. Right.

So you decrease that blood flow. You wait a certain amount of time.

It comes back to the normal state. Decrease it further.

Bigger step. Wait, it comes back.

We call this the auto regulatory plateau.

Meaning that you have a region in terms of perfusion pressure.

It's also called the Larsen curve for the person who, uh, showing it for the first time.

You say you have this is your perfusion pressure, right?

And this is the blood flow per, uh, you know, 100 gram of tissue in this particular case.

You have something that looks like this. But you have an auto regulatory plateau, and often this is shown as 50 to about 150mm of mercury.

Don't hold me to that. I don't know where they come up with that, but over a wide range of of perfusion pressure.

Right. In steady state. The blood flow going to that territory and in no changes in metabolic need demand of of that tissue.

Right. That vascular territory regulates its own blood supply fairly constant.

Now you can roll off over here. Where?

All the vessels are maximally vessel dilated. And if you have no more capacity to raise or dilate in your perfusion, pressure goes down.

Ultimately, the flow will go down right? So actively auto regulated.

Pressure passive and pressure passive. Maybe as a clinical vignette.

One of the hypotheses of brain injury in the pre-term neonate has to do with the fact that the auto regulatory

mechanisms of the brain might not be fully developed for the preterm baby that are born at around.

You know, 24, 25, 26. Weeks of gestational age may be an interesting question for the gentlemen in the class.

What's normal term gestation? Right.

3637 okay, good good, good. Glad you guys know.

Some years. I look at blank stares by the gentleman about normal gestation, even though all the ladies exactly know the answer.

You all should know. Okay. With that auto regulation.

There's a transient response, as you will see over here. Right.

This is now shown. This is essentially showing the dynamics of auto regulation.

Oh diagrammatic. Right. So let me walk you through over here.

So here is our step response in pressure. Right.

We have a normal normal pressure perfusion pressure over here right.

This is over here. You can have a step up in pressure or you have a step down in pressure, right?

That's our that's what I've shown you over here. Right.

And when we have a step up in pressure, we have a transient response of the flow normalized here to baseline.

You see that goes up. But then the way the constriction over here allows you to, you know, come back.

Right.

And so what you see over here is that there's a stretch that has to do with the initial response of the, of the step in perfusion pressure, right.

And a concomitant increase in the transfer of pressure.

But then you lead leads to ways of constriction so that you actually coming back down in your,

in your flow to, to relatively normal opposite happens when you actually step back down.

Right. Then you have the reverse that's happening.

Okay, now, I've shown you this on the other side already.

This is a transient response. This is your auto regulatory plateau.

This is for auto regulation in some kidney territory. And you have a press pressure passive state over here.

And you have the actively auto regulated state over here. I've drawn over there.

And then it would sort of lift off on that side. Right.

Now. One way to increase your, uh, need for metabolic uh uh, um,

demand is is exercise of now mentioned a couple of times with different levels of exercise.

And what you see over here is a blood flow going to the exercising muscle.

Right. And what you see over here is you're going up to certain levels in the response over here.

This would just mean that depending on the exercise in steady state, right.

That that plateau is a different a different levels.

Okay. Yeah. I do not mind.

Yeah. So this one here.

Or this one here. On the left here. Exactly.

So in the body. Right. So we've dissected in the two slides that cost you a lot of discombobulation.

Right. We've separated these two mechanisms.

Right now if I actually have an isolated hind limb preparation, am just stepping up the upstream pressure.

The transfer pressure will also change, right? So in the intact circulation these mechanisms can happen together.

And they do happen together. As I said how they integrate.

I'm giving you the output of all of this. How they integrate. We don't necessarily know.

But what this is over here that the down slope and resistance is exactly has to do with the fact that you have a step response over here,

that it takes time for that stretch to then be transduced into the constriction of, or the cross cycling of the actin and myosin.

But once it can actually generate an active tension, it acts.

It generates the tension in such a manner that your flow is actually coming back to the normal.

Reverse on the other end of the step down. Okay.

And that is also shown then over here where now we're changing nothing in terms of pressures or flows or changing nothing in terms of the pressures.

All that we're saying is, all right, here's our normal 97% oxygen saturation.

Right. And now we're generating we're pushing 30% oxygen in.

Into the territory, right? What would you expect to see?

Would expect to see vasodilation, right? All of the things being equal, you want to actually make sure you decrease the oxygen tension.

You're reducing the substrate availability. Right.

And if I'm if I'm a cell that's sitting downstream of that, it's like, wait a second.

You know, I need more oxygen. Right. CO2 builds up.

Vessels with or dilate. You have an increase in blood flow.

You bring it back. Comes back. Okay.

And then finally, um. Reactive hyper premia, meaning that if we actually we can all do this experiment.

If you want, we can all hold one hand like this, right?

And we lift another hand. Up in the air.

In previous years, we've taken a picture of this class and see how many people participate in our questions and answers, right?

And have fun. So we'll do this for a while. So what happens? What happens in the hand that's up in the air.

What happens to the perfusion here. It decreases, right.

What happens to our perfusion over here? It increases.

So. No, no, no, you keep it up. It's not down yet.

So how long do we have to keep it up for? But a couple of seconds.

So tens, tens of seconds. Right. We're saying that the mechanism is 30 40s.

Right. Let's say we want to have a few, uh, um, time constants here.

Let's let's do this one. Come on, man, you can do it. This is not even exercise.

All right. So here's what we're going to do. So don't do it quite yet.

So what we want to do is we want to bring down this hand very quickly and that no no no not yet.

So and then when we do this we want to then compare the color of the two hands.

Right. So if all goes well and all the regulation is fine initially this should look more pink than this, right.

But then observe for tens of seconds we I, we know, we know.

Right. So so it might it might be difficult to perceive for some.

Right. But then observe for about ten 20s right.

For ten 20s and see the color change of this one. Right.

So 321 go.

So look, keep. Keep looking on. Keep looking. On the other hand.

That's. Good. That's what I was promised.

You know. Did you see it? All right.

Maybe on this side. Could have been. Yeah. So next time. All right.

So what did you see? Nothing. So who?

How many saw nothing. All right. How many saw when?

Actually, they brought the hand down. That it was slightly paler than the other hand. All right, I saw that.

So as you're waiting for like, ten 20s who saw the color of the left hand, then coming back, right.

Well, a few people. Right. So what I saw is that maybe we take a video and we have a canonical way of showing this, you know, for everybody.

So what I saw is that this hand, actually, that I was up after I became redder than this hand.

Right. And so what happens here is, is this is this mechanism of reactive hypothermia is you're cutting off the blood

supply or the the you're increasing your decreasing the perfusion pressure.

Right. You're cutting off the blood supply for a while. So the blood flow is going down.

Right. But as as you're actually going up because you have accumulation of vasodilators as the blood flow is going back up,

there's an additional massive vasodilation and you have an overshoot.

And that overshoot in blood is what we wanted to see.

And maybe some of you did of of that, you know, that the color went red and then came back down.

Right. And it's kind of a dose dependent response over here.

Okay. What about the giraffe?

How is it possible for the giraffe to actually drink right?

Then quickly raise its head because there's a predator coming and running off.

Why is the giraffe not fainting? No giraffe.

Physiologist in the in the room. Okay, so people didn't know for a while, but let's actually look.

So I took this from the histology atlas that they asked us to buy for our.

When? When I took anatomy. Um, you have a vein over here.

You have, uh, an artery here, a vein over here. You see a beautiful, nice, um, endothelial layer.

Right? You have the vascular smooth muscle over here, right on the artery.

You have it on the vein over here. You can see this over here, right?

What about the leg arteries and the leg or the leg arteries? Of.

Of a giraffe. If you were to see this in a human.

Right. This would be massive atherosclerosis. Right, doctor, salts would look pretty bad.

Right. But this is industry strength. Vascular smooth muscle.

And the giraffe legs. If you look at the giraffes, it's actually has fairly spindly legs for the rest of the body.

Right. But by having essentially industry strength, vascular, uh, vascular, smooth muscle and in the leg vessels.

Right, you actually prevent blood pooling. You have massive vasoconstriction control that you can actually bring in.

Um, so that's one thing is like very powerful, um, ways of constriction.

The other thing is that the fascia. Of the legs over here is actually very stiff, meaning that you're actually preventing the,

um, um, uh, blood pooling and essentially the, um, this is from early days of fighter jets.

The giraffes have their own anti suit, meaning that they are actually preventing because of the and the tightness of the fascia around the,

um, the vessels, but also because of the ways of constrictive mobility.

They actually they actually, uh, reduce or significantly reduce the amount of blood pooling that happens in the legs.

So that's it's also a quadruped. Right. So that's, that's also happens.

Right. One way valves to reduce venous pooling.

Another thing that I've already talked about is if you look at the heart size right from a mouse through it.

So this is a logarithmic scale of body mass. Right.

Mouse rat rabbit dog goat man cow horse is a little higher right over there.

Orders of magnitude. So what do we have. We have at least we have five orders of magnitude over here.

Meaningful pressure, about 100mm of mercury. As I already mentioned, the giraffe is sitting over here, right?

Also, for humans, the heart side is about 7.5g/kg of body weight.

For the giraffe, it's about double that, right? Very powerful heart. Now, one thing that I don't have a slide for, but that I can also tell you.

Is this? Over here? Um, it's possible because, uh.

Uh, meaning that, you know, you drink, you should have congestion of the vessels in the head, right?

Because you're now way below the level of the heart.

You have a hydrostatic pressure gradient, that is, you know, from something over here to something over here is sort of meters, right?

So you would have significant congestion when you do this. And then if you rapidly raise your head, you know,

why does the giraffe not get dizzy and have to hold on to something until the heart rate kicks in, right.

Never seen that happen. So they have what is called a rate mirabilis or a miraculous network, um,

at the level of the skull base, which, when the giraffe is upright, is actually collapsed.

It's a sort of an arterial venous network, but it has more characteristics of a sort of a venous nature.

Right. That is collapsed. But when they actually lower the head, that is an accessory pathway to accommodate blood.

It's essentially a reservoir that fills up. And that is a sort of a bypass in some sense.

You know, to the brain, the brain still gets enough, um, blood flow.

But that vessel, uh, network actually fills up.

And then when they actually raise their, um, their head, they can actually draw from that network.

And so they, they don't faint. Okay. So see what you get for your, um, for your tuition, not just human physiology.

You also get giraffe physiology. Okay. That clock is very confusing because it's still on the old time.

So it's 1230. It's not 1130 okay. All right.

So much for. Auto regulation.

Right. The mechanisms that allow relaxation, that act on the vascular smooth muscle, the mechanisms that allow for constriction.

And the guiding principle is what is needed in terms of the um.

In terms of the, uh. Um, metabolic need of the vascular territory.

We still have about 20 minutes. So I'll get started with, with with the extrinsic control.

So the slides should also be available on canvas to you. Extrinsic control really relates to the more global control mechanisms that are now

coming from the brain and that integrate sensing mechanisms from across the body,

as I mentioned, and that, um, initiate a global response to, uh, cardiovascular, um, blood pressure homeostasis.

So one way to think about or a, um, a, um, useful way to think about feedback control mechanisms is in the engineering,

uh, context has to do with sort of these simple diagrams.

Right. We have a variable.

That is controlled. At your home. It might be the temperature.

You might have a thermostat, right? And some of you might like your temperature in unreasonable units of degree Fahrenheit to be 67, right?

Others might like it a little warmer, might 71. Right.

What happens in the background is that somewhere in the room you have a sensor that measures temperature, right?

That sensor measures the temperature and compares it against the reference where you would like this.

The reference to be right could be 65, 67.

Could be whatever. Right. So you have the sensor and you compare what you measure against the reference.

And if it's within a half a degree or a fraction of a degree, or maybe within a degree, you just don't care.

You don't want your furnace to come out and all the time, right? When just falls below a threshold, or switch off the moment it crosses the threshold.

So there's some control logic that says if you have a certain deviation from the temperature,

right, actuate something, switch on the furnace or switch on the AC.

Right. And then there's factors. As I just said.

So the fact is that your home is either a furnace or is is is a cooling system, right?

And that kicks in you continuously sense and the idea is that you bring what is being sensed closer to what the reference is, right?

Slowly you should actually bring it up or you should bring it down. Right.

But once we are within some error tolerance, right, that's where you sort of want to be.

Now, exactly the same thing. We have a controlled variable.

In our case it's arterial. The way that we exemplify it will be arterial blood pressure.

All right. We're talking about arterial blood pressure homeostasis. So the question then is what are the sensors that sense arterial blood pressure.

Where are they located? That tells us something about the importance of the various organs close by.

What is happening over here? I'll do a little bit of song and dance, but as I already said, we don't really know.

This is a very this is an abstraction. If you're telling me where in the brain is the reference value inscribed for arterial blood pressure,

we that that obviously is an engineering abstraction that doesn't exist.

Right. There's no, you know, permanent memory where value is inscribed and the control system is compares to that value.

Right. But it's a it's a, it's a it's a useful method to actually understand the closed loop short term control mechanism.

And then what are the effectors, how they respond? What is the dynamic response?

How fast, how slow? Right. Is there a hierarchy of of responses in terms of magnitude, but also in terms of um.

Response time. And then there's a communication system that we have to have.

Right. Somehow we have to communicate. At home you have wires, right?

You have wire from your sensor. Somewhere that wire goes into your thermostat.

That thermostat has a wire that goes to the furnace or to the AC handling unit, the air handler.

And and they're all wired together. So here the question is also what's the communication system.

All right. So first let's talk about the communication system.

And this is neuroanatomy 101. Brain.

Spinal column. That's it. Central nervous system.

You learned it here. Right now. Secondly, around this is we have protrusions coming out of our central nervous system, right.

We call them nerves. I mean, there's also nerve fibers going up over here.

Right. But we have cranial nerves. Right.

And you've learning anatomy. Those of you who took anatomy remember your cranial nerves.

Right. But we also have fibers that are coming from the thoracic, uh, uh, spinal column over here.

Right. So, um, that have certain synaptic characteristics.

And then we have lumbar and sacral spinal nerves coming out of the spinal column.

And for our purposes, what we're really interested in is these two major divisions of the autonomic nervous system,

meaning this the part of the nervous system that's not under our voluntary control.

Right. We have the parasympathetic division, also known as the rest and digest response.

And we have the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system, which is also known as fight or flight response.

So as the name's already suggest, fighting. And, you know, fighting is not something that you usually do on the couch after Thanksgiving.

Right. So when you had your big Thanksgiving meal.

Which of the two dominate? It's your resting and your digesting.

Right. But if you get revved up, if you get on a treadmill,

or if you actually get into dangerous situations where it's real or perceived danger, you're getting into a state of agitation.

You're getting a state where you're ready to fight. Right?

That's different from, well, maybe some some of you fight during Thanksgiving,

but usually that's depends on the familial situation or where you invite invited.

Right? At any rate, the point here being that the name already suggests that there's a seesaw kind of relationship, right?

You would not bring both of them up.

You're not finding yourself in a situation where you want to rest and adjust, but at the same time, you're going to fight someone, right?

So what you will see is that there is really this push pull behavior where one

dominates and it down sort of scales the other one or the other one dominates.

And, you know, the first one is somewhat downscale.

So what we have over here is also known as the cranial sacral mechanism or division or the thoracic or lumbar mechanism.

So these are cranial nerves over here that constricts the pupils, that stimulate salivation.

That slows the heart rate constricts breathing.

Stimulates digestion. Stimulates gallbladder contracts bladder, stimulates sex organs.

That's rest and digest. And if you look on the other side, it's it's again it's a seesaw with pretty much the opposite.

Constricted pupils dilate the pupils. If you're resting and digesting, you don't have to scan the neighborhood for predators, right?

Usually none. They're on your couch, right? If you're out in the wild and you're in a in a agitated state, you want your pupils to be dilated, right?

You want to have visual acuity. You scanning the environment? Heart rate accelerates.

Heart rate slows down. Facilitates breathing. Breathing is reduced.

So we will talk briefly about sort of a little bit of the synopsis and, and you know, where the, um.

Connection to the end organ and how it occurs and what the neurotransmitters are.

Suffice it to say here for the.

We were talking about the adrenergic receptors that are most important for the cardiovascular response is that we have alpha receptors.

Those are mostly at the level of the peripheral circulation.

And when stimulated, lead to a powerful ways of constriction response.

Right. So ways of constriction at the level of the vascular smooth muscle.

High dose epinephrine vasoconstrictor. Epinephrine vasoconstriction.

That's what we've indicated over here. Epinephrine at the level of the, um.

Sorry. Nor epinephrine at the level of the, uh. I don't know why I have this one over here, but epinephrine,

norepinephrine at the level of the vascular smooth muscle over here, primarily alpha response.

I'd epinephrine as a beta two vascular relaxation response.

We talked about this but in high doses also has very powerful alpha response.

So it depends on an organ. Beta one receptors.

Cardiac receptors. Increase heart rate. Increase contractility.

At vascular smooth muscle we have alpha receptors. Vasoconstriction beta two receptors.

Vasodilation. Okay. So similar to have low battery here I'm going to run out of.

Um. Similar to the table that we have in the previous one.

We have a table for what the adrenergic impulses are.

Right. So mostly sympathetic. And what they're calling neurotic impulses are mostly person.

Right. So what are the effects over here? We talked about the eye.

The heart. Mostly interested in the heart. So if you have adrenergic impulses coming from the sympathetic nervous system.

Strong increase in heart rate.

Increase in contractility, conduction velocity in, you know, of the electrical impulses going through the heart rate increase in automaticity.

And at the level of um. So at the level of the if you note, right, increase in automaticity, his Purkinje system, increase in automaticity,

in conduction velocity in the ventricles, we have very strong powerful increase in contractility, right conduction velocity and automaticity.

Right. So sympathetic stimulation, as I showed in the previous slide, we think of in terms of increase in heart rate and increase in contractility.

Right. What about the parasympathetic side or the cholinergic impulses right here.

What we're saying at the level of the AC node we have a very powerful.

Cardiac deceleration. Through parasympathetic stimulation that is, um.

Mediated primarily through the vagus nerve.

Vagus nerve being one of the of the cranial nerves, and it can go so strong that it can actually go into cardiac arrest.

So you have an overwhelming response of the vagus nerve. And I think we talked about this when we talked about carotid stimulation.

And I also briefly mentioned that. So a friend of mine classmate actually in the HST program, he was prone to going into supraventricular tachycardia.

Right. And so we also, you know, enjoyed playing soccer at some point.

I saw him at the side of the soccer pitch, and he was doing this right.

So he knew that he actually went into a supraventricular tachycardia.

And what he was doing here and what he's also quieting down.

He was doing sort of a salvo maneuver, sort of like a, you know, lifting maneuvers.

If you lift something heavy, like lift something up.

Right. But these maneuvers do, it leads to a significant at one phase of these maneuvers leads to a significant cardiac deceleration effect.

So what he what he was trying to do, he was trying to actually stimulate his parasympathetic response because he was in this supraventricular

tachycardic regime that he realized and he was trying to get into a situation of essentially an easy block,

was trying to abrogate the supraventricular part of the tachycardia.

That was reentrant. Right. And he managed to do that after, like 20s, he was back on the soccer pitch.

So you learn how to how to deal with it. But the the the the the primary take home message from this over here is very strong cardiac deceleration.

Don't do it unless you you would. But you wouldn't be doing it down here anyways.

Here you're doing a gentle, very nice massage of your carotid artery, huh?

Yeah. And good one. Because you also don't want to be in a situation where, you know, cutting off the blood supply to both of you.

Right now, you have a posterior circulation, right?

You have a. But we also want to make sure that your circle of rulers is properly connected.

Right. At any rate, cardiac deceleration. Now at the level of the arterials.

Right. Sympathetic stimulation.

Leads to primarily vasoconstriction.

There's some dilation over here that relates to the beta response, right.

But primarily the effect of sympathetic stimulation of fight or flight response is a constriction over here like in veins or systemic veins over here,

alpha stimulation is constriction. And that leads to a reduction, as I already said, in the zero pressure filling volume.

And in the um, in the therefore the, the, uh, increase in the descending one.

Right PMS. V total -0 pressure filling volume with the zero pressure filling volume goes up right.

The descending volume goes, it goes down. The descending volume goes up.

Okay. Some of the other things are interesting but are not of relevance to us over here.

So. The effectors briefly we can talk about.

So the communication pathway the sympathetic and the parasympathetic fibers of the cardiovascular system.

Right. And the the the effect is simple.

We've already mentioned them. Vascular resistance. Venous tone, heart rate and cardiac contractility.

And all of these are represented. Maybe not Venus toned, but very Venus zero pressure feeling volume.

All of these are represented in your cardiac output venous return curve formalism that we've talked about you know at length right.

So if the blood pressure's down compared to where we think it ought to be, what are the effects you want to bring.

Heart rate up. Contractility goes up, right?

Resistance goes up, Venus stone goes up, or Venus zero pressure feeling volume goes down.

And now you can actually think through what is the primary insult.

If you have a stab wound and we're bleeding, or we have a fistula or we have a myocardial infarction, right.

What is the primary. How would the cardiac output venous return curves shift?

If we just had that insult and no control. And then we can think through what happens now when heart rate increases.

What happens if contractility increases? What happens if resistance increases?

What happens is if zero pressure fluid volume goes down. All right, all right.

We will play these games. And I think I'll stop here.

I'll give you an early exit before spring break because otherwise he has a good break point.

Then I'll come back after spring break to, uh, to finish up the control part.

Spring break is next week. So news to Doctor Stoltz.

Spring break. No no, no.

We have Harvard. Spring break is next week, right? Yes.

So, no. Now Harvard and. We'll see you the Tuesday after next week.

All right. Now, the teaching staff and the students are on the same page. Right.

Sorry. So one more thing. One more thing. Uh.

Said. If you want a hand in the AP said on Sunday or even on Monday.

Right. Be our guest. We don't look, I mean, focus on your on on your midterms.

Take a little bit of a breather. Hand it in sometime on Monday.

Fine with me, but don't let it spill over into your break too much right now.

We will hand out a new problem set. In the next few days.

That problem set will not be due next week. Of course it will not be do the following week.

It will be due the week of the Tuesday of the mid-term.

Right? But we do want you to work through it, but we want to also give you enough time to work through it.

All right. Are we all on the same page? All right. Thank you. Thank you.

