[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Again with just a little bit of a review of what you have learned thus far, and try to put all of the work into context,

because these are things that we will be revisiting over and over again as we go into, uh, pathophysiology.

Yeah. And so the pathophysiology block will be a lot easier insofar as you can get these concepts ingrained in your mind.

So first thing we started out talking about the cardiovascular system.

And you can group the cardiovascular system into two big blocks.

So there is the heart lung pumping unit. Blood returns to the heart lung pumping unit and from this unit goes out to the peripheral circulation.

Very simple lumped parameter model. So the heart lung pumping unit.

Just just to review blood returns to the right heart.

The right atrium goes to the right ventricle. Pulmonary arteries from the pulmonary arteries goes to the.

What organ? Lungs. The lungs. Returned blood to the.

The left side of the heart. Correct. Let's be a little bit more granular.

Blood from the lungs go to. Pulmonary veins, which goes to the baby, which goes to the.

Goes out to the. Excellent.

And then we go to the peripheral circulation. Each of these we can break this down.

Just this is just what you have just articulated to me.

Let's you. Right. Heart. Right. Atrium.

Right ventricle. The valve between the right atrium and the right ventricle is the.

Tricuspid valve. The valve from the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery is.

Pulmonic valve goes through the. Pulmonary section goes to the left.

You just told me this. Yeah.

Left atrium. But what's the what's the what's the structure? No no no no no.

You're getting ahead. So from the from the pulmonary circulation, the pulmonary veins, the valve between the pulmonary veins and the left atrium is.

No, there are no valves. That was a trick question.

I was like yes. Okay. All right. So left atrium to the left ventricle.

Via what valve? Right. Mitral valve.

And then then we, uh. So we'll stop there. Stop there. That's the end point of there.

So this now, we talked about modeling the right heart.

And in particular we're going to talk about the right ventricle. This model is, uh, to spring.

Model spring in a relaxed state. Which is this diastolic curve.

And a spring in an active state. So in this and that's the systolic curve.

Yeah. Now, this is not you know, it's not a it's not a, uh uh, uh, uh, tension length relationship that you would typically have in the spring model.

This is a pressure volume relationship, but the concepts are the same.

There's a relaxed state where there are actin myosin are not bound to one another.

And and in this state actin and myosin are bound together.

So it's a very tense muscle as opposed to very relaxed muscle. Yeah.

The um the volume on the x axis mimics stretching of the, of this spring.

Right. The greater the volume, the greater the stretch of the muscle of the muscle fibers.

Yes. And the pressure mimics this tension relationship that you can measure from a spring.

So this is a force. This is a simple Hooke's law relationship.

Except it's now applied in the context of the vent of the ventricle.

Resting model and active model.

And then we have our four phases. So this is filling right eye contraction ejection relaxation.

That's the right ventricle. We can apply the same principle to the left ventricle.

So all concepts you should know for the exam.

From this I have explicitly written, or we have explicitly written what the particular volumes are.

From this you could get the stroke volume. Yeah, this you could get the stroke volume.

Yes, yes. And then stroke volume times the heart rate gives you the cardiac output.

So these are the parameters that are important. We can combine all of these data.

To get one. Representation from the output.

Flow per unit time from the heart lung pumping unit.

Yes. Some assumptions are here because you'll notice this all depends on characteristics of the right ventricle.

There's nothing in from the left ventricle that appears. So now.

So there are some assumptions in which this relationship is true.

And f is the frequency. Heart rate.

Beats per unit time. Some assumption.

We assume that the pulmonary arterial pressure is constant.

That is these these are the characteristics that make this relationship true.

Let's you. So these are the mathematical, um, relationships that must hold.

What does this mean from a teleological standpoint? That the right ventricular volume is not maximal.

So the right ventricle is not, um, it's not failing.

It's in a regime in which it operates in the way that you would expect, and also that the left ventricle is not failing.

Yeah. So the systemic aortic pressure is below the maximal pressure that the left ventricle can, can um, can operate.

So three things. Pulmonary arterial pressure is relatively constant.

Right ventricle is in its operating zone that it likes to be at.

And the left ventricle is not failing. If all of these things are true then this relationship holds.

Yeah. Right ventricle is happy.

Left ventricle is happy. Pressures are constant.

Okay. So what is it? So in a normal state and this is the normal state,

all of us are operating in this state where our cardiac output is influenced most by the right ventricle performance.

Yeah. So. And that's kind of easy to understand, right.

If you think about this. So I used to use an analogy with um.

Pee-Wee Herman and Arnold Schwarzenegger. But.

As time goes on. Nobody knows who Pee-Wee Herman is.

That's before your time. So I'm going to try to come up with another analogy that is going to be apropos.

So. So let's say you had a, uh, third grader.

And a, uh, a, uh, a, uh, a, uh, uh, a bodybuilder.

Two individuals. Yes. And they're doing a, um, water race.

Yeah. So the third grader has to take a bucket of water.

Run over to the bodybuilder, who then takes the bucket of water and dumps it into some big, fat bath.

Right. And it's got to be that the the race is over when the bath is full.

The rate at which the water goes into is dictated by the third grader, not by the bodybuilder.

Right? It's the third grader that will determine the rate at which that that bath gets filled.

And it's the same thing with the left and right heart. Yeah.

Right heart is weaker. It can. The left ventricle can handle any load.

Because it's all of the reasons that we've talked about. It's a thicker muscle.

It has a pump against higher pressure. It's the bodybuilder. Yeah.

And the right ventricle is the third grader. Makes sense.

You should look up Pee-Wee Herman. Just get it. Um.

Yeah, yeah. So here and now.

So this is a bit out of order. So here the for the peripheral circulation we had this model.

This was our circuit model. That we had to model this.

All of these slides should be loaded. Should be loaded. And from this we get a venous return curve.

And this is our win Vin Kessel model. There are a set of ordinary differential equations which dictate this.

We had some. We had to make some definitions for the mean systemic feeling pressure.

All of that is is really not that germane.

This but is on this slide really typifies the normal physiology that is important to note.

Um, moving forward and and for the exam.

This is just a mathematical representation of the venous return curve.

Yeah. So we've got our venous return. We've got our Venus return.

Uh, that's flow associated with the peripheral circulation.

Got a flow associated. Yeah. With the heart lung pumping unit at steady state.

These have to be equal. That's the definition of steady state.

So you can, um, uh, do substitutions is just as a mathematical relationship.

And this is the exact relationship for the cardiac output at steady state.

Right. And so it has factors in it. It's influenced by what happens in the peripheral circulation.

We have this fixed pulmonary arterial pressure. We have arterial of the, uh.

Um, compliance. So all said and done, the frequency, the heart rate applies here, but it's not.

It's actually not that um, intuitive looking at this, looking at this equation.

Yeah. So there's another way that we can do this instead of doing this.

Uh, looking at the mathematical representation, more oftenly and I think has been done on the oftenly.

More often. And I think this is what was has been done on the set.

It's it's graphical relationships that help you understand a steady state.

And now changes in different parameters, um, affect the steady state.

Case in point resistance does not appear here.

So it's really got to have its effect on the venous return curve, which will then influence the steady state position.

So how do I say that. How can you say that. So this is your, uh venous return curve from the peripheral circulation.

Means a stomach filling. Precious. An open chest bottle. So that the, uh, inter thoracic pressure is zero.

Your slope. Is this. Right.

And that's just a straightforward application here. Right. And this is I mean systemic selling pressure.

On the side of the, um, the cardiac output.

This is your cardiac output curve. Simplified representation.

Slope. Maximum value, a point at which it becomes flat Vmax over c sub d, right.

And a similar relationship from using the arterial uh rtl pressure in systolic and diastolic.

If you know this relationship, you can answer any question.

Any questions given to you, right. What happens to the resistances?

You know, if the resistance goes up or down, this changes the slope.

Yeah. What happens if Vmax or you know, what happens in terms of the height?

How the frequency affects the slope. What does not affect the slope?

Does that make sense? So you can understand the intact system and perturbations to that system.

Precisely. This is a very, I think, an important, um, and a summary way of all of the information that's here.

And it provides a good backdrop in which to answer questions about how different perturbations will affect the cardiac output.

Yes. Questions. All review.

This is all review. So this all holds.

All of these relationships hold given these assumptions.

Yep. This is an assumption we're not going to violate. We're always going to assume this.

It just makes things a lot simpler that the PR pressures are approximately, uh.

Are, for the most part, constant. We'll get well, maybe on.

This Thursday on Tuesday will try to address with cases when that's not the case.

But again, all of the plots that I've shown you again, right ventricle is happy, left ventricle is happy.

But that's not always the case. So do you remember this plot? Remember this?

Yes. So all of this stuff that we've talked about is this zone one.

Right ventricle controls. Yes.

So this these are all says the right ventricle is happy, the filling pressures are low and the left ventricle is happy.

Zone two. Here is when the right ventricle, um.

The volume is maximized. So the pressures are quite high.

The right ventricle cannot augment its cardiac output.

Very, very hard for it to do because it's pressure. It's maximally dilated.

So here this says the left ventricle is happy and the right ventricle is not because the filling pressures are very high.

This is just an application of this where vbox is replaced for the for the right ventricular.

Uh. Volume. And then in the latter case, when the left ventricle fails.

So that's when the right ventricle fails and the left ventricle.

And we'll talk when we get to heart failure. Cardiomyopathy.

We'll talk about we'll talk about these things.

The vast majority of what you will see and what you've seen up until now, because you have not seen any pathophysiology is just restricted to.

Which is encompassed by the relationships that I showed in previous. Yeah.

Makes sense. Quick summary.

Normal physiology. Important things to know for the exam.

Okay. But there was something else we talked about that will be on the exam.

And that's the electrocardiogram. Yeah. Yes.

No. Yeah. Okay. So this is our model.

Um, that allows us to derive some simplifying fundamental insights into how the what the electrocardiogram is.

Yes. So I'm not going to go over the assumptions.

You know, that there's we ignore the, you know, capacitance, contribution to the impedance,

uniform resistance and so forth that that stuff is not really, not really, really important.

What is important here is this relationship. That is the upshot of the mathematics that arise from this.

So for each lead, what you're measuring. It's a different.

Between two values. Right.

So here we have an electrode electrode measures the electrostatic surface potential at a particular point.

As to right arm electrode, you have the left arm electrode.

And lead one. Is the difference between these two?

Left arm minus. Right on. Yeah.

So again the machine is to all of this is review. I'm repetition just helps stuff marinate in the.

In the, uh, in the, uh, in the cortex.

So you are continuously recording electrostatic potential at the right on the left arm.

And then what you see plotted is a difference between the two. The all of these readings are obtained simultaneously.

Yes. Is this like, should I not go over this?

Is this like to like two? Yeah. This is good. Yeah.

I'm okay. So the but the upshot here.

So let's forget about the differences and the precise math. What is the take home message.

And it's a qualitative one. So this vector.

It's is time dependent. This is the net dipole moment.

Each little myocardial cell. Has its, you know, transports its own ions.

And we'll talk about that next. But you could at any point in time.

Yeah. Get a dipole moment from that. My from that myocytes.

So another experiment I am my heart is beating.

Yeah. And at some point in time uh time t equals zero I take my heart out and I put it in a zero Kelvin bath.

Stops all ionic movement. Yeah.

So then I take the heart out and I measure the dipole moment at different points at about every myocytes.

And so I've got lots of vectors and I sum them all up.

And that's my net vector at time zero.

That's what this is. I could restart my heart, let it beat and a time delta t put it back into a zero degree Kelvin bath.

Do the same experiment. Measure the dipole moment at each of the myocytes.

Sum them together and this may be in a different orientation and have a different magnitude.

Yes. So this is time dependent.

But at time zero where it's frozen and I have a fixed orientation and magnitude to this vector, what does that correspond to I need one.

It's just the projection of this vector on this line.

That's all the electrocardiogram measurements. It's projections of this time dependent dipole.

And you can think about it very discretely TA0 delta t two delta t delta t small.

And you could do this experiment. Get the dipole moment the net dipole moment.

And um know exactly how it would project on each of these on each of these lines.

That's the electrocardiogram. So I review again.

This is the same. This is the experiment that I've just articulated.

So this, uh, signal begins at the signal node.

That's the heart's, um, built in pacemaker depolarize.

These cells are all electrically coupled.

You have gap junctions between the myocytes, ways to allow information transfer from one myocytes to another.

And then I freeze the heart, put it in my zero Kelvin bath. I measured my dipole moment at all of these different myocytes.

And this is the sum. So what was this correspond to or lead?

What? Well, I'm going to take this. I've got to transport it down to my I Tobin triangle.

And I could get the projection on each of the three leads.

Yeah. So it'll be slightly upward. And lead one the three and lead two.

Yeah I can after the all of the atria are depolarize.

Then something funny happens because atria and the ventricles are only electrically coupled through a specific structure,

and that's the AV node bundle of his and the left and right bundles.

Yeah. So whereas here it starts and it gets spread all throughout the atria.

It gets to the AV node. And then there's a specific pathway in which the signal is transported.

Just transported first down the left bundle and goes from left to right.

Now. So the most anterior structure and chamber of the heart is what?

What chamber? Right ventricle RV.

Right ventricle. Yeah. Uh, you're in an accident with an RV, you're most likely to harm the right ventricle.

Yeah. So one way to remember it. Now that I've said it, you will never forget.

And I promise you it'll come. It'll come back as morbid as it has.

So the right ventricle is in front, so the left atrium is on top.

So depolarization of the atria goes this way and then it goes out.

Right? So down and out. Now it's not completely orthogonal to the plane defined by the right arm, left arm, and left leg.

So it has a little bit of signal left. So it's out. It's kind of like that.

Oops. So take this.

Oh, there's a huge component of this that's out that we're not seeing out of the board.

So we're just seeing the it's actually projection in that plane and the consequently lead one.

It's negative positive and lead story negative and lead to.

We can run this experiment all day, like zero Kelvin bath, doing the addition of all of the dipoles,

getting the net current dipole, putting in a token triangle and getting the associated positions.

So ventricular depolarization is complex.

It's not a single spike right? The p wave is one hump.

It's H of depolarization. But the ventricular depolarization we refer to as a q r s.

Yeah, the Q the Q part, that's the intervention killer septum depolarization down towards the left ventricular apex.

And then the lateral wall which gives you the S wave. Yeah.

Okay. So across. Left ventricle depolarization, and then the whole system is depolarized.

And you see here the S wave doesn't appear in every lead.

It's not prominent in every lead. The fundamental physical, uh.

Um, process is the same, but the view differs a lot depending on the lead, because each lead is a different view of the same underlying process.

Yes, but you can, you can you can dissect that.

If I gave you an alien. Have they had an alien? Hard problem.

Yeah, right. Uh, for the for the egg. So. Right. So if you have, um,

if I could give you a complex alien heart and you could tell me what you would expect to see in terms of the projections using the same principle.

You know, one of the things that is a little bit, um.

Confusing. It's the p wave is H of depolarization.

The q r s wave. Is ventricular depolarization.

You don't see atrial repolarization, right?

Why? It's.

That's right. It's happening in here. This shows.

Um. Strictly speaking, is a summation not only of ventricular depolarization, but atrial repolarization.

Because the magnitude is so small, it doesn't really change very much if you saw it, if it was there or not.

The other thing that is confusing is that the T wave.

It's upright. Yeah.

The tea wave goes in the same direction as the P wave.

But they represent very different things. Yeah. The tea wave represents what?

Ventricular repolarization, and the P wave represents atrial depolarization.

Why are they the same? Why are they the same? Direction.

Um. Uh, I think Sam, for.

Can you say that? Louder. That is 90.

That is correct. Why, though? Yeah.

You got. You got it. You got. I'm just. I'm just pushing you on purpose. Yeah.

If you got the wrong answer, I left you alone. But you got the right answer. And anybody.

Yeah. Uh, people are.

Yes. Right. So. So that is I would if you could articulate that just a little bit.

Um. Yeah. These are both erudite comments.

I just wonder if I can make them a bit more a bit more precise. Both of these statements are correct.

Let's see if we can parse that just a little bit. Uh, repolarization happens outward.

And as Sam Sam said, because the effective refractory time of the epic cardio myocardium is less than the than the then a sub and a sub in the cardio.

This will become important when we talk about ischemia.

The difference in the relative refractory times of the of the myocytes from epic cardio to end differ.

So these. Start to polarize first.

So if I did my zero Kelvin experiment.

Yeah. And so here it's depolarized. It's depolarized.

The polarization starts I stop my stop the heart by putting in a zero degree Kelvin bath.

Take it out and measured all of these dipoles. It would be the same direction as in depolarization.

Yeah, because the arrow goes from the depolarized to the not depolarized tissue.

Is that? That makes sense. So it looks the same because a process happens backwards.

The physical principle that is important here is a relative refractory time of the myocytes, from the radium to the end card.

It makes sense. So hence the T wave is upright.

So all of this is three leagues one, two and three.

These are the leads. Right. Yeah.

Um. But there are some additional leads that are used in practice.

And these are called the augmented. Now, I've said that the important point with each of the leads, the way that we can understand it,

is it is the projection of that, um, that, uh, the heart dipole, the net current dipole on some line.

The lines are clear when the electrodes are on the arm. These are mathematical relationships.

What really are we trying to encompass? What is the dipole.

The net current dipole. So I'm going to use net current dipole.

Net heart dipole. Interchangeably I mean the same physical thing because it depending on what you read it's called all different different things.

What is a projection. So this is my heart dipole.

This is the line that connects the heart and the left arm.

So it's a little counter-intuitive or a little maybe a little bit hard to parse,

because in the limb leaves there are two electrodes I can point to one electrode,

I can point to the electrode, and there's the line that connects them.

But for the augmented limb leads, you can point to one electrode, but you can't point to the other.

The intention, though, is that it mimics the from the heart.

To the left arm, right arm or left leg.

Mathematically, it's this. So here.

This is what this is. This is, um. Or this should be, uh, on the market anyway.

It is the left arm. Let's see. But, uh, what?

You get the electrostatic surface potential from the left arm, and it's the average of the other two.

So the so the reference point. So the left arm and the average of the other two, which is approximately where the heart is located.

That's the intent. That's the intent. That makes sense.

You've only got three measurements to work with to calculate these.

You only have your electrostatic surface potential the left arm, the right arm, and the left leg.

So if one is, if you're going to the first one that you subtracting the first reference point, it's a left arm.

The other reference point comes from the other two. And it's just the average of the two.

Does that make sense? So while these are the mathematical relationships, these this is how you should think about it.

Right in terms of our formalism, where the dqg measures the projection of the heart dipole on some light.

Does that make sense? Yeah. So we have.

All of our vectors. Now we can write them in the following way.

One. Two three. AVL AVR.

And we have the angles here. So this you should know. Now, what do I mean by no.

Yeah. You guys can bring a cheat sheet. Yes. Is it?

Was it is it, uh, two by four inches? And you can use front and back.

This is something that I would say it's 8.5 hours. Yes, I would, I would when I point to things that I say that you should know.

Yeah. I am advising you as to things that you have at your disposal at the.

Okay. Now.

Yeah. So here I'm going to go through these different leads again. With just, um, how the, um, how the signal originates.

Yeah. So the signal, Rachel node is located where?

Cool. Yes. Yes, but I was looking for a bit more specific.

On the cardio. Yeah, right.

So it starts here and you get depolarization of the side of each field.

Note down this way. So this is what it looks like on lead to positive deflection.

Then it goes from the, you know, there's this specialized tissue I talked to you about.

Write a note and it goes on the left. On the left to right.

That's slightly negative. In late two. Down towards a left ventricular apex.

Very positive. Lots of muscle getting depolarized and then depolarization towards because it goes down and around and up.

So it's slightly negative. And then repolarization happens in the same.

Yeah. Now, one thing to note. These are not independent, right?

Yeah. So we're not viewing really six independent leads.

In fact, mathematically, then nobody can tell me how many leads you need to be able to derive the others.

So there are six. There are six leads, but they're not independent.

Alexi. Yeah. Two. Yeah. You only need two of them in practice.

The other four are, um. It's, uh, linear combinations of the others.

Right. But it's hard to do the math in your head, and each of them do provide incremental information.

So just as a just as a point of, uh, point of reference. Why do I say that?

Because this is. What it. But it looks like only two.

And I think in the group that was I was working with, he went with it.

What would you expect to see in AVR? Approximately.

Yes. The inverse. Yeah, because it's in the opposite direction.

So in principle, I could give you a few leads, but you could really infer approximately what you would expect to see in another lead.

Yeah. Because it's just a mathematical transformation.

You know, for the most, for the most part from one to the other. But we could go through this process.

All of you could see AVL and the three. This is negative.

This is positive. So these are similar relationships.

Um, but I can the point I was trying to make is that from the net,

from the pathway in which depolarization happens, you can map out what the electrostatic.

Sorry. What the. What the, uh, egg would look like on any of these?

Any of these six leaves? Yep.

With me so far. Should I keep going?

Or is this like, um, yeah. Okay. So the egg moves in three dimensions, right?

So the all of these data come from three electrodes.

Three points to find a plane.

So it is impossible for any of the any of the information arising from these to give you data about how, um, the dipole moves outside of this plane.

Yeah. So that's why you have the chess leads.

The chess leads give you information that, um,

about movement of this dipole outside of the plane defined by the left arm, the right arm, and the left leg.

So chest leads v1, not lead one V1 is distinct from lead one.

We talked about lead one before. It's the left arm and the right arm. This fourth intercostal space on the right side along.

Um V6 and uh mid axillary.

Mid axillary. And what do they represent?

Again, a guiding principle is that a tracing on any particular lead.

It's a projection of the heart dipole on the line.

So if I want to understand what the readings would read on each of these, I have to tell you what's the line.

Yeah. So the line goes from the heart to that electrode.

So mathematically it's, you know. You know, these are all approximations.

You take the average or the I'm sorry or the some, some average,

but doesn't matter of the, of the, of the, um, of the readings from each of the leads.

But the idea here is what is represented. It is the projection of the line formed by the heart and that particular.

So let's do the same thing that we did previously when we did, um.

Um, h of depolarization. And in the Italian triangle with slim leads.

So depolarization begins right at that juncture.

On the cardio side. Defined by the superior vena cava and the right atrium.

Remember, right ventricle is a most anterior. Left atrium is the most posterior structure.

Chamber right up against the esophagus. So depolarization Hap starts out here, but it goes left and right.

So the p-wave in V1 is biphasic and that is normal.

There's an upward deflection that represents the right atrial depolarization and a downward deflection that represents the left of the polarization.

So yes, I know I see people staring at this. This is intended to be somewhat, um, downward.

There's a downward component to this. I should have made it more obvious, but I was trying to convey that the.

The, uh, the negative deflection is small with respect to the positive deflection.

That's what I was trying to convey. Then was depolarization of the ventricles.

Remember, it starts out left. To right ventricle.

And that's this. So that's positive. So in the, um, Q wave, right.

Represents the inter ventricular depolarization of inter ventricular septum.

Yeah, but in the, um.

And the chest leads the prick cordially. It's the positive deflection.

So it's again just just highlights the fact that it's the same fundamental physical process.

Um that but is looks very different depending on where you look.

Yeah. Makes sense. And then in the, um, little leads was the archway wave.

That was the big ventricular depolarization. But here it's the S wave.

So what is important in this, in this diatribe is that the the names of the waves q, r, s can mean different things.

I mean, they correspond. I'm sorry. They correspond to the same physiologic process.

Right. But the, um, ah, wave at V1 is something different than the wave in lead one.

Does that make sense? Yeah. So this is why we talk about the q r s complex.

And we try to group them together as being ventricular depolarization because of precise components.

Yeah. Might mean different things. Does that make sense?

Yeah. Okay. And then we have finally the t wave, which is normally inverted.

In league. In li V11 thing.

So the second, what do you think about the T wave? It's a typically goes to the direction of the maximal crest complex.

This is mainly ventricular depolarization. The repolarization mimics ventricular depolarization.

Yeah. So the the Q Rs is mainly positive.

Indeed, once the T wave is positive and what you need v1, the QR is is mainly negative.

So the T wave is. Yeah. Charles. Yeah.

Good question. So, um. Let's, uh, let's let's, uh, let's think, think, think through this.

So the what's the best way to look at the posterior aspect of the left ventricle?

So this is not drawn to scale. This is a schematic.

But if the posterior wall of the left ventricle here. Is here.

You additional leads give you information. Direct information.

The information here is not different, frankly, than some of the information here, but it's easier to see.

Yeah. Similarly the right ventricle, not the scale.

We can do right sided. We. To get information about the right ventricle.

So it's really these leads do not encompass all of the, um, all of the regions of the heart that may be of interest,

because some of them are just harder to see because the projections are weak based on where the electrodes are located.

That that makes sense. And typically the signal that you get is much lower in amplitude.

Yes. Yeah. When you do posterior leads and right side, it leads.

Yeah. So you can follow this exercise all the way around to get what the.

Uh, but check to projections would look like on each of the, um, records or chess leagues.

Yeah. So a full electrocardiogram.

Just 12 leads. Six of them.

Are the pre cordially. That's projection outside of the planes.

Standard. Sagittal plane. Left arm. Right arm. Left leg. That's here.

And then projections outside. Almost not quite orthogonal, but certainly in a different direction.

Outside of that plane with a recording. So 12 lead.

Electrocardiogram. Just the last thing to review here.

So remember all of these electrodes are recording simultaneously.

Yes. Yeah. So you, um.

Here, you're just plotting the difference between the left arm and the right arm.

Yeah. This your plotting the difference between the right arm electron and the average of the other two.

But then there's a switch in terms of what's being plotted. Yeah. Um, this is, uh, the electrostatic, uh, potential along v one.

Again, the reference u minus the average of the other two not.

That's the I'm not I don't want to harp on the reference point, but then you switch to v4 all simultaneous when you interpret your electrocardiograms.

Yeah. You can use the simultaneous action.

To help you in diagnosing. So here.

These all are simultaneous. These all are simultaneous.

Yeah. So if I didn't see a p wave here, it's like, well, you know, I'm not quite sure.

What about the other leads along the side. Is there a p wave there.

Right. So you can use the fact that that these are simultaneous speeds to help you in diagnosing things like atrial fibrillation.

What is h of. That's a characteristic.

Who said that? That's a characteristic of atrial fibrillation.

It's great when you see something that is irregularly irregular.

Think of the relation. What does irregularly irregular mean?

Some striving a little bit away from the definition. So asking another question we'll return to that.

What does irregularly irregular mean. Uh, sorry.

We get Jackie. For A-fib.

Oh, so you getting to the definition? No, no, no, it's okay.

We'll come back. We'll come back to that. But this is sort of an English question, right.

What does irregularly irregular mean?

Yeah. American. It's.

It's okay. So I think you're that is that is that is that is correct.

I'm going to say that sort of in a slightly different way. It has to do with predictability.

Yeah. So regular. Um. Uh.

Yeah. Irregular. Yeah.

You see. But I can predict when. And I'm going to hear the next impulse. Irregularly irregular means it's not predictable.

Yeah. So that you have a sequence of beats and the appearance is, you know, this is not, you know, depends.

Random is a charged word, but I'll use that just for the sake of clarity.

It's random. You can't predict what the next beat will be. So the spacing between them is very, very arbitrary.

When you see that you should suspect each a fibrillation until otherwise.

But now let's return what is. I think Jackie was started to.

So I cut you I cut you off guard. Uh, did you want to articulate the definition of, uh, uh, of offense?

So. So yes, the sentiment is absolutely correct. The macro engine circuits are more of apropos for flutter.

We'll get to that in a minute. Oh, Kyle, do you wanna say something? Yes.

Same have a lot of great. To.

So this connects to my original discussion about finding p waves, which is why I diverged into this H of revelation.

So in H a fibrillation there are no. Cannot find.

Because all of the myocytes in the atria are all depolarizing independently of one another.

Yeah. So instead of having concerted contractions,

you've got them all doing this and they have to work together to pump to generate a p wave means that they all have to contribute.

Each of these current dipoles have to be added if if they're random, they really don't.

They're not additive. In a productive manner.

So you really don't see any P waves, no P waves and a regularly irregular rhythm?

Yeah. Is atrial fibrillation until proven otherwise?

Typically with atrial fibrillation.

All of these individual myocytes, they're sending impulses down to the AV node because they want to conduct down into the ventricles.

But this AV node is being bombarded with lots of different information.

And some of them hit at the um within the relative refractory period and able to pass through some or not.

But because it's not at a set frequency in which this is because it is random, the subsequent ventricular beats are random.

Yeah. And the heart rate tends to be very fast because there's lots although the frequency,

it's not a set frequency, it's much more frequently the interval.

The the cycle length is on average much faster. So in normal hearts.

So in order to add an irregular irregular rhythm no p waves and fast typically it's tachycardic.

The definition of tachycardia is. I'm sorry.

Greater than 100. Greater than 100.

Yeah. Yes. I'm actually. Just make.

If I could. Us.

Yeah. No, that's that's that's a good question.

I'm not quite sure that I'm aware of people that have done the rigorous that have done the studies to answer that precise question.

You do see variations in the magnitude. Um, but that's usually averaged over some, you know.

Um, these things are usually averaged over some region of the myocardium.

Moreover, the patients that have chronic a-fib, they have a lot of fibrosis in their in the atria and the fibrosis itself can be,

um, can, um, help in organizing the current and also can be places in which these currents start as well.

So I don't have a satisfactory. Answer to that.

I'm just not aware of any data that answers that in that way. But the but the observations are as I've articulated.

Okay, so things to keep in mind for atrial flutter.

Jackie alluded to this. What is atrial flutter? Charles.

Yeah. Excellent, excellent. So let's talk about characteristically what do we see.

Whereas in tribulation it's irregularly irregular.

In atrial flutter it's typically regular. And you do see.

Because unlike um, in atrial fibrillation, all of the myocytes.

Are sort of, uh, beating and depolarizing independently.

In atrial flutter, there is concerted movement.

Now, if the heart rate, if the heart rate is fast is typically about 300.

You still get a lot of stagnant blood. That's around because it's not a full contraction like these partial contractions that happen.

So there's still a lot of stagnation of blood. But you do see the P waves.

Now the air of so most of flutter we call common atrial flutter.

Bless you. And the p waves are inverted.

In The Inferiorly. A flutter.

P waves p wave rate is about 300 beats per minute.

Yeah. And the P waves are inverted. This is what we refer to as a sawtooth pattern.

And the ventricular rate is typically 300 divided by n, where n is an integer.

So if every one of those p waves conducts down, the ventricular rate is 300.

If every other one gets conducted, then the rate is 150.

You say that's 2 to 1 block. A common rhythm seen in atrial flutter, atrial flutter with 2 to 1 block, and a heart rate of 100 and.

Yeah. I didn't put any examples of any of these rhythms here, because I know that, um,

the future Doctor Jail is going to have some examples that she will opine upon on, um, on, on Monday.

And I didn't want to take. All of the time to to, uh, to do this.

So atrial flutter rhythm. You should know. Fibrillation.

You should know. Ventricular tachycardia.

What's ventricular tachycardia? Oh, my.

Very fast ventricular rhythm. And you.

So let's let's pass past that a little bit. So ventricular tachycardia the ventricles ventricular tachycardia are beating fast.

The beats are ventricular. There may be P waves.

They may not be p ways. The ventricles don't care because the rhythm begins in the ventricles.

Doesn't matter what the atria doing. Yeah.

So it's a it's a rate greater than 100. And because it begins in the ventricles, typically it's outside of the normal conduction system.

So typically the queue is wide. Why she's looks different than the baseline.

She's rate of 100. May you may see P waves.

You may not see P waves. Oftentimes when you see P waves they are unrelated to the ventricular rhythm.

So this is what we call v a dissociation a rate greater than the atrial rate.

And then the, uh, ventricular rate is, uh. And then the ventricle beats themselves up quite wide.

Um, make make sense? It's a coffee. Okay.

I, um. So a couple of other things.

And maybe what I'll do is electric again on Tuesday. Maybe I'll bring some of that.

It depends. Um. I can bring some examples of some, uh, rhythms.

Yes. No. Um, and then we could go over them in some, uh, some detail, some more detail.

But things you should know if a fib, a flutter, ventricular tachycardia, and the heart blocks.

Heart blocks. What we should do. I'll just give a just give a short, uh, statement about those.

So. One of the things about cardiology that I have mentioned over and over again is that it is so simple.

It is so simple. You have a few simple guiding principles a heart block.

What is hard for? So there are three types of heart block.

Yeah. And listen how simple this is right. So. And type one.

Every P wave is conducted. It's just slow.

And type three. No P waves are conducted. And type two is somewhere in the middle.

Some P waves are conducted and some aren't. That's simple.

That's simple. We can break it down into the different types of type two block.

When you block non winky barking maybe I'll leave that for for next time.

But those are the three categories. So the normal PR interval is what?

Lesson 200 because some budding cardiologists in the in the uh.

Yeah. Right. So so we have uh, so it's less than 200 milliseconds.

Yes. And so in first of the heart block, the PR interval is greater than 200 milliseconds, but every P wave is followed by a QRS.

And every QRS is preceded by a P wave, 1 to 1 correspondence and third degree heart block.

The P wave has some rate. The QRS complex has a completely different rate.

Which is less than the P wave, right?

To make the diagnosis typically of third degree heart block, the p wave rate has to be greater than the ventricular rate.

Yeah, and they're unrelated. They're unrelated.

So sometimes you see a p wave running into a QRS complex so that you know it's not conducted,

but that and in the end, if you know it's not one of those two, it's always easier to deal with the extremes, right?

Is it first degree or is it third degree. And if not, then it's second degree.

And we can talk about differentiating the types of second degree. Um, later.

Okay. Any any questions? I wanted to devote some time for this review, and then, um, we'll take a break.

We'll come back. We'll start when? We'll start talking about hypertension. Five.