[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
This is one of the, um. Um, slides that I showed last time.

And to get everybody back oriented. I, um.

We said. We talked about the depolarization and repolarization physiology of the individual cardiac myocytes.

Um. The. Communication from one myocytes to another in electrical terms, can be viewed as a current that goes from one cell that is, uh, uh,

depolarize to a cell that is re polarized, because that current has a directionality that is determined by the geometry, uh, and the magnitude.

We can represent these currents as vectors.

And because we have many of them. Because it's this wave of depolarization.

We can sum them all up in a vector sense.

And come up with this white, um.

Uh. Vector over here.

That is what we call the single equivalent current dipole vector.

I have not used the word moving yet because that's where we're going to get to next.

So as time progresses from one time to the next, right.

More and more cells might participate in that wave of depolarization that in the top left part over here.

Um. Uh, relates to the spread of that depolarization wave across the atria.

Now, let me see whether I can actually. Um.

Can actually use. I don't have like a laser pointer here.

Doesn't seem to be the case. All right, well, you have to contend with this, uh, pointer over here.

Now, as time progresses, more and more or fewer and fewer and changes in the directionality of these currents mean

that this wide equivalent current also changes in magnitude and changes in orientation.

And even though in this image sequence that we've seen over here.

The. Locus or the location of the origin of this wide vector changes when we zoom out,

and we think that the heart is really a point source in a huge spherical torso,

as we've assumed in the, um, in the next sort of step of relating the microscopic current to the macroscopic voltages.

We assume that the origin of this white vector is actually pinned at the origin of our coordinate system,

meaning that the the origin point of that white vector doesn't change, but the magnitude and the orientation changes.

And hence that is our single equivalent moving type, we'll call it.

So I just want to point to there's a pointer, Marla, because there's a pointer that you can use.

And there's also the left hand corner sort of a like a pen, a laser pointer that you can hear this right.

And stuff. All right. Thank you. Thank you. Those from all of you got me I pressed on the wrong thing.

Thank you. All right, so then as we've seen over here, the the the activity of the depolarization and the repolarization, can you know of,

of this complex three dimensional structure where these currents go in all sorts of direction but in

a very defined manner in the normal physiology can all be boiled down to a can all be summarized.

In terms of this orientation and magnitude of this single equivalent, uh, dipole.

And this is, uh, a single equivalent moving current dipole representing the, the,

the, the, the, the vector sum of all the individual elemental dipole currents.

So the next step that we did then in the next in the past lecture is now our our weight vector over here sits at the origin we designate.

Excuse me we designated as m. And now it it turns around in this 3D space pinned at the origin.

And the question that we asked ourselves is we have a current dipole that sits at the origin.

What is the induced voltage or voltage difference that we measure at the at the body surface,

making a whole host of assumptions, all of which we we know to be wrong, namely homogeneity of the of the medium.

Isotropy. We have a spherical, um, torso where the size of the torso is very large compared to the size of the heart.

All of these things are incorrect, and I spare you the details of what we've done well here.

Here are the assumptions also that it's linearly resistive.

All of these slides you already have from the last lecture, I just want to show the final.

Result of what we developed at the last lecture, namely that the potential phi.

Ed capital R, which is the radius of our sphere, a distance R away from the dipole current of magnitude m,

oriented along what we would say the z axis over here.

Is related. Those two quantities are related through a prefecture.

That prefecture encapsulate encapsulates the geometry of the problem.

Three over four pi r squared four pi r squared is, you know, very reminiscent of the surface of a sphere.

Right. Uh, there's a factor of three over here.

But then there's also sigma, which is the resistivity, um, uh, or the conductivity actually, and not the resistivity, the connectivity.

So this prefecture has the electrical properties plus sort of geometrical factors.

And then we have this m times cosine of theta where theta is the angle between

the vector of point of observation and the orientation of our dipole vector.

Right. And the magnitude of the dipole vector is the current times the separation of

the two current sources that that we had in order to have a current dipole,

we had one current pointing this direction, one current pointing the other direction.

And one thing I want to emphasize over here is that the current.

Is given by the current density times the surface area over which the current actually, um, flows, or the current density flows.

We could also write this as. Let me see whether I can do this here.

Now. No, I can no longer do this. Uh, maybe I can one second here.

So we can also write this over here as J, which is the current density times the area a over which that current density flows times.

The distance to. Okay. That will be important for later on.

Okay now. This over.

Let me go back and get rid of this thing. I have my laser pointer back.

So. The cosine of theta over here is reminiscent of the dot product.

Meaning that we can write all of this as phi at the point a.

Over here is the m vector.

The m vector.

Now dot it into the uh, into the unit vector pointing in the direction of a, and the uh, constant of proportionality, um still remains the same.

So let me go back over here. Let me delete this thing.

Okay, so. But what we want is not a, um, a single measurement.

We want to measure the potential difference.

And what I've also shown last time is that it follows then that if we're looking at potential differences.

So two measurements of potential on the surface of the sphere that this is simply linear superposition.

It's it's the voltage or the potential that we measure point A minus the potential that we measure at point P.

So we can simply use the previous equation and dot our vector of the current magnitude,

our current dipole vector, into the vector difference of the two of them.

So here we define e b as the unit vector in the direction from a to b okay.

So m e ab is then the projection of the current dipole vector onto the line connecting a and b.

So if you draw a line from B to A, that's then the uh.

The direction on which we want to compute the, um, the projection.

So I also, at the end of the last lecture, introduced the three main, uh, lead vectors in the frontal plane.

I also made the point that a single wire connected to, uh, a gel electrode is oftentimes also called the lead.

But we are talking about lead vectors over here. So the lead vector one is the one pointing from the right arm to the left arm.

Lead vector two from the right arm to the left leg, and the lead vector three from the left arm to the left leg.

So if we're interested in the scalar electro uh, electrical activity scalar potential projected onto the lead one.

Uh, axis of, uh, lead one vector.

We are looking at the projection of this m vector onto this vector of lead one.

So that's exactly what is meant by L one over here.

So we're computing the voltage difference phi le.

So this is left arm minus the right arm.

And that would then be the by linear superposition the m vector dotted into the um the direction the unit vector in the,

you know, from the right arm to the left arm. And in complete analogy, the we can do this fully two and we can do this fully at three okay.

So in other words, our our scalar electrocardiogram,

the squiggly lines that we will read very soon and is nothing but the projection of this M vector onto different axes,

um, that we are defining right now in what is called the frontal plane,

meaning the plane that is is shown over here, sort of the, the, um, the vertical plane.

Um. And later on will also talk about the, uh, the, um, the recording leads.

All right. So in as I said, this is the key points over here.

We reduce the distributed source, which is really complex complicated because of the complicated physiology,

the anatomy, the topology of the heart, the topology of the surrounding tissues.

But we reduced all of the electrical activity of the of the heart into a single hard vector

with a single origin in space and time varying magnitude and time varying orientation.

We trace the 3D trajectory of the tip of that hard vector M and the scalar potential at any time.

T is the projection of the instantaneous hardware hard vector onto the lead vector.

Okay. All right.

And the egg is that scalar potential versus time as the hard vector moves through these different loops.

So. Let's take a look at this again.

So that's the essence of the dipole model. And now let's put this to good use.

And now I'll give you five minutes maybe or so to think through this problem over here.

Let me let me identify or let me define the problem.

This is one of these alien hearts that you may or may not encounter in your clinical practice.

Um, probably less likely, but you never know. Where space will take us.

So. One of your alien patients has an unusual cardiac anatomy.

Um, depicted below. The velocity of the propagation of the action potential is the same in both tubes.

So we have one tube that takes.

This is the vertically oriented tube that takes the blood from the body and propels it through peristaltic contraction towards the lungs.

And then there is another one.

That is equivalent to our left ventricle, where the blood comes from the lungs and through sort of peristaltic contraction moves it towards the body.

Currents only go into the longitudinal direction of these tubes.

We say the velocity of propagation is the same, so that we don't have to worry about that and the time required for the action.

Potential travel. The length of the tube is 0.8 seconds. However, the left heart.

Begins to depolarize 0.4 seconds after the right heart.

And what you are asked to do by your attending is to plot the expected scalar potential versus time in lead one.

Note the cross-sectional area of the muscular wall of the left heart tube is twice the area of the right heart tube.

We recall that the magnitude of the dipole vector is directly proportional to the cross-sectional area,

and you may assume that the magnitude of the current dipole is just simply a for the right ventricle.

So what you are asked to do is to draw the scalar.

Potential. The projection of this electrophysiological arrangement in the lead one configuration.

So if I go, I will leave this opened or I can go to the next one.

So here you see the lead one is going from right arm to left arm.

And what I would like to see down here is a drawing of what that potential would look like.

The magnitude of the vectors over here because the cross-sectional area doesn't change, stays constant throughout the depolarization phase.

And we only worry right now about the depolarization phase.

Is the task clear or should I go over this again?

So what we're looking for is this thing starts to die.

No, wait a second. Uh, the left heart begins to depolarize.

0.4 seconds. So the right heart starts to depolarize.

And let's take time. Zero at the beginning of the depolarization of the right heart.

The left heart starts to start 0.4 seconds later.

Let's assume that the length of the tubes are the same. Orientation is orthogonal and the cross-sectional area is double for the left.

Then what we have for the right. All right. Why don't you guys take five minutes to think that through?

In those five minutes, I will actually get myself a coffee.

Okay. What's the time right now? Let's come back at 11 and then we'll talk about it.

For some reason, I feel compelled to whistle the jeopardy theme song.

But I will not. All right.

Maybe a couple of more minutes. All right.

Who wants to, um. Who wants to tell me?

Tell us. Anybody.

Um. I can give it a try. Mhm.

Um, so for the first part because we're going like bottom to up, then the projection to lead one is zero.

So at the beginning zero and then uh 0.4 when the second part starts to the polarize we see an increasing magnitude.

Here's where I'm not super sure. So we know that the thickness is twice.

Um, so I think that would mean the amplitude would be twice to like today.

Um, but I'm not 100% sure. And then that would go on for 0.4 seconds and then it would go back to zero.

Okay. Excellent. Thank you very much, Claudia. Well done.

Better than my straight line attempts over here. So let's see we have.

This is 0.2, right? Uh, Jesus Christ.

2468. One second over here.

Right. This is and then this is 1.0.

And then this is. One. Point two.

So this is a and we know that the cross-section of that the current magnitude of the right ventricle is a and then the current magnitude of.

The left ventricle must be, as Claudia rightfully pointed out.

The right ventricle, the current is pointing up right is going along the propagation velocity.

So it's zero compared to the L1 direction.

So the projection of uh so the current dipole and the and the lead vector are orthogonal.

So the projection is zero. So the the left the right ventricle does not show up in the lead one configuration at 0.4 seconds.

The left ventricle starts to depolarize and we have a constant propagation velocity with constant radius.

So what will happen is that we simply have this for 0.8 seconds.

Right. And then we go down to zero. All right.

Thank you. Claudia. Well done. So let me delete all of this and let me actually show you what it what it does look like.

Oops. Come on.

And so if I go to the next slide. Uh, what happened here?

All right. And my animation has got. One second.

But sharing. Going on over here.

Uh. I have to unhide this slide. Chair again.

Yeah. You see? That's exactly what Claudia mentioned.

Okay. Hide the flooring panel. Excellent.

Okay. Easy enough. Right? Okay.

So we go back here. I get my laser pointer back.

That's exactly what we have. We have that projection onto the onto the lead vector.

So. Let's come back to our our, um.

Our picture over here. We also said that the that during atrial depolarization, our single equivalent dipole vector traces out a loop,

traces out a loop for for atrial depolarization, for ventricular depolarization.

And you will see for ventricular repolarization.

Here is our triangle. Lead one. Lead two.

Lead three.

So as the cardiac activity is is spreading from the single atrial node which is sort of on the right side pointing towards sort of the left right,

the vector. Is pointing into the positive lead one direction.

So here's our vector. Positive lead, one direction.

Positive lead, two direction and positive lead three direction.

So as the atria are depolarizing. We have a positive projection on lead one.

Lead to lead three. And that gives rise to what is known as the P wave.

The initial positive deflection in lead one. Lead to lead three is the depolarization of the.

Electrical activity. Um, the depolarization of the atria.

Then. As I mentioned, the atria and the ventricles are electrically isolated.

Except normally through a small tissue structure, which is called the atrial ventricular,

not the sole purpose of the a V node is to slow down the propagation velocity

so that the atria can now go through this excitation contraction coupling.

Remember what we've just described is just the electrical depolarization.

Now the calcium induced calcium release and actin myosin cross bridge cycling has to occur so that the atria can actually generate a force

that pushes just a little bit more blood into the ventricles before the ventricles start to go through the same cycle of depolarization.

Calcium. Does calcium release actin? Myosin. Cross bridge cycling.

Fourth generation. So at the conclusion of the, um, depolarization of the atria, there's no more wavefront.

There's no more front between the depolarized and the polarized cells.

So that vector disappears in magnitude, right.

If there's no current left, there's no equivalent dipole vector.

As I said then there is this period of relative quiescence where the electrical activity makes its way slowly through the AV node,

and once it hits the common bundle of his and travels down the bundle branches, the septum depolarize.

This usually from left to right. Which then, as you can see over here in lead one would lead to a negative projection on the lead vector.

So the first. Um, projection that we have.

Onto lead one would be negative, right?

Because the lead vector is pointing from right to left arm, but now the vector is pointing from left to right.

Likewise, in the two we might often see a slight negative deflection.

May also not be quite discernible in lead three.

The initial septal depolarization might show up as a is no projection at all, or is a positive projection.

So the first negative deflection after the p wave is called the q wave.

And then as more and more of the ventricular myocardium continues to engage in that wave of depolarization,

the vector starts again to point sort of from the right towards the left,

um, a direction, and you again see a positive deflection in lead one, a positive deflection in lead two, and a positive deflection in lead three.

So the first positive deflection following the p wave is called the R wave.

And. We have then this this, um, strong positive deflection until the whole ventricular myocardium is depolarized.

And again, the equivalent dipole disappears and we have a full q r.

And then if there's another negative deflection called the s wave.

And that is the hallmark of ventricular depolarization.

It is a very sharp, very narrow, typically highest amplitude, um,

in terms of magnitude of the amplitude structure of uh, or feature of the electrocardiogram.

And then as the ventricle starts to re polarize, we again have a boundary between repolarization and depolarized cells.

This time. And so as this wave goes, not from the IndyCar team to the epic card game to the epic card game to the IndyCar team,

we have another one of these loops, the third loop, which is the repolarization loop of the ventricle.

And that again leads to. An appropriate, uh, um, projection on these three lead vectors in the frontal plane.

And that leads to the T wave. So p wave atrial depolarization.

QRS complex very narrow very sharp very high amplitude ventricular depolarization.

And the T wave is lower amplitude a little bit more spread out ventricular repolarization.

Now. Why is the QRS complex the ventricular depolarization so narrow is because we're making use of the electrical conduction

pathway that very efficiently brings the electrical activity and the depolarization signal to the ventricular myocardium.

So essentially the entire ventricular myocardium, all the muscle cells act over a very depolarize or very short period of time.

And remember that our M vector, our white vector that we're showing over here is the vector sum of all of these.

And if we can activate essentially all the all the cells or majority of the cells at the same time,

then we have very many of these elemental currents that contribute to the vector sum and therefore to the magnitude of that M vector.

If it's more spread out, if it's the nearest neighbor kind of propagation,

first of all, that propagation is slower, so it's a little bit more drawn out.

And the vector sum is not as coherent as when everything is is coordinated.

So that's why the magnitude of the T wave and the magnitude of the QRS complex are different.

And also why the duration over which the depolarization occurs is different from the duration over which the, um, repolarization occurs.

But that now is the essence of the the three projections of the um,

of the electrical activity of the heart and the cardiac cycle throughout the cardiac cycle on these three lead vectors.

Lead one lead to and lead three and two, we have a p wave.

We have a small quiescent period where the, um, electrical activity travels through the um, uh, AV node.

We have the QRS complex, as we call it, um, for the ventricular depolarization.

And we have the T wave, which is the ventricular repolarization comma.

So there's a couple of hands raised. All right. Whoever raised their hands, you can unmute yourself.

Ask. Maybe. Rachel, you can.

You can call on people. I don't have the chat open anymore, so go for it.

Yeah. Uh. Zane, it.

Um, I had a quick question about, like, even though it's like kind of propagating from the left septum to the right, it seems like here, um,

later on that it's like, still like the depolarization is ending on the left ventricular side, and that's why it's showing the S part as negative.

Is that correct? Mhm. Correct. Okay.

And I also was a little bit confused about the direction of like the repolarization

dipole being the same as the people are like depolarizing dipole because it's like,

why is it not like opposite or why am I not. Yeah.

Why is it no the opposite. Because the propagation velocity is in the opposite direction.

So the, the the depolarization goes from endocarditis to epi khadim and the realization goes from epi khadim to endocarditis.

So it's not the first one in. First one out. Uh, so it's the directionality of the wave is is in the opposite direction.

That's why it doesn't it doesn't flip. But if it's in the other direction, wouldn't it be like pointing the other way as well?

I don't, I don't understand um, the, the, the current direction is, is is also reversed.

So if you have two negatives then you have, you have essentially a positive.

Okay. I'm going to think about it. Thank you. Okay. Who's next?

I had a question. It seems like the magnitude of the projected vectors on lead three throughout

the whole sort of cardiac cycle doesn't seem to really occupy a very large,

large range of values.

I'm wondering sort of what information like lead three would offer in terms of like, does you just have reduced signal to noise there,

or does it offer nuances that are important or what does what additional information does it give you?

So it's a good question because you could also argue that, you know, it's sort of the linear superposition, at least algorithmically.

You know, you should be able to reconstruct lead three from lead one and lead lead two.

Right. So it it's um, it can have value, especially in conditions where it's not a normal conduction.

Right. So if as we get through, you know, to arrhythmias and to conduction, um, abnormalities,

then the situation might not be as prototypical as I'm, I'm making a show over here.

But there's another important piece of information that we might have, we might be able to glean from lead three.

Um, as from lead one and lead two that we'll touch on later when we talk about, um,

the access or the mean electrical access, um, during ventricular depolarization,

because it can give you information of how the heart or the, at least the electrical,

um, uh, representation of the heart is oriented in the, uh, in the thorax.

So there's, uh, changes in the orientation can also be an deviations from the normal form.

Normality can also be very important. But a good point, Alexi.

Thank you. Do we have any other thing?

Any. Any other question? Um, so there's been some general questions in the chat about the alien problem.

Um, I don't know if we'll get back to it. We have aliens.

We have. We have more aliens to come. Or the same alien. But but we'll we'll we'll, uh, we'll cover that.

Let me and let me get to that, actually. So then this is our, uh, you know, lead one surface electrocardiogram.

As we said, we have the P, the keywords and the T wave. And we also define intervals over here.

What will become very important is the PR interval is, uh, you know, QRS, um, interval, the, the duration, um, the interval.

We will also briefly talk about sorry, the short interval we will briefly talk about.

And when we talk about ischemia on myocardial infarction, we will also talk about the St segment elevation and depression.

And there are norms that these intervals and these amplitudes should be within.

Um those are listed in the in your course in notes that we that we handed out.

But also Doctor Tatro will have a lot more to say about what is a normal PR interval.

What is a normal course interval. You know, what is um, what is a normal amplitude for the for the QRS complex?

But suffice it to say for now, p ventricular, uh, A3, atrial depolarization,

cure's complex ventricular depolarization, T wave, ventricular repolarization.

And then there's always a trick question is why don't we see a atrial d repolarization.

We see the atrial depolarization. But where do we find the atrial repolarization?

Well. We find it. If we were to find it, we would find it in superposed, you know, with the QRS complex.

But remember that in order to have a macroscopic vector.

That is large enough so that we can sense its magnitude on the surface.

You have to have some of somewhat of a coherent, um.

A vector of some of these individual currents. And if these repolarization happens, you know, on a more random basis,

then you might not have a cure here in some of you might not be able to measure the repolarization, um, at the surface, um, of, of the torso.

So we typically do not. Um, measure or cannot sense the repolarization of the atria because it's a much less myocardium.

And also because, um, the there's no such thing as, as, uh, measurable repolarization wave for the, for the atria.

So that's why we only see the p wave. So as a depolarization of the atria, but not so much the repolarization.

Okay. Before we come back to our alien.

Um. We can define all sorts of of projections, right?

I mean, lead one, lead to lead three.

We're just convenient projections, um, to use simply because it's easy enough to put an electrode on the left arm,

on the right arm, and on the left leg.

But we can also take averages and, and define additional, um, so-called augmented leads and what we are showing over here.

Um, is that we can take the average. Of the voltages measured on the, um.

Uh, on the left leg and the in the right arm, or what they call the foot over here and the right arm,

we take the the average of those two and reference it to the left.

Uh, the left arm. And that would be a vector that points from this position over here towards the left, or from the origin towards the left arm.

We call this AVL for augmented limb lead.

Left arm or left.

We can do the same by averaging the two potentials that we measure at the right and at the left arm, and reference it towards the foot.

That then is called the AVF augmented limb lead, you know, pointing towards the foot.

And likewise we can measure the left arm and we can we can average the left arm and the foot.

Um, um, potentials and reference ID with respect to the right arm.

And this would then be called AVR. So what is commonly then reported,

as we will see in the 12 little electrocardiogram for the frontal plane of the projections are leads one, two and three.

These are original limb leads plus the augmented limb leads which is AVR, AVL and AVF.

And you can very simply remember where they point their point.

If it's AVL, they point from the origin towards the left in this triangle representation from the origin towards the left arm,

from the origin towards the right arm, and from the origin towards the foot.

Again to Alex's point is, what's the point of all of this?

Is it in certain conditions, when you're trying to pinpoint certain pathologies with either the,

uh, um, the origin of, uh, the impulse generation or the impulse propagation?

It's good to have multiple different projections so that you could actually you can actually pinpoint the,

the, the location or the, the specific nature of the abnormality better.

So then one of these triangles over here will become your best friend.

So lead one again. Right arm to left. Right arm to left arm right with directionality.

Lead to right arm to left leg. Lead three is from left.

From left arm to left leg. And then we have AVR, AVF and AVL over here.

And the way that it is customarily then indicated is that with each one of these directions we have a um a number associated.

And the number is the degree of deviation from the horizontal in the clockwise direction.

So in unfortunately not the mathematical definition of deviations which would be counterclockwise positive angles but in the clockwise direction.

In this case, lead one. Is oriented horizontally.

Pointing in this direction shall lead one is associated with zero degrees.

Lead two or let's go with lead AVL over here.

Lead AVL is -30 degrees because it's pointing from the origin to the left.

Um over here lead AVF is plus 90 degrees.

It's pointing from the origin straight down right.

We have a AVR is pointing from the origin to the right arm.

And that would be here negative. Uh um uh 150 degrees.

Right. So for this we would go negative. We don't go over 180 degrees.

And then for uh, the right the um, lead two, we would have 60 degrees.

And for lead three, we have 120 degrees. Okay.

So this, you know, should probably be on your sheet sheet for the midterm exam.

This is just a different representation. As I said before. Zero is lead one plus 60 lead to plus 90 AVF plus 120 uh lead three -30 AVL and -150 AVR.

And that's just again it's only in the frontal plane right.

Okay. We come back to our alien here.

And maybe what I can do is I can bring up the 24 messages over here.

Okay. Um. So let's see.

Maybe what we can do is the following. We were coming up to our usual break time, so why don't we do the following?

We'll take a ten minute break at this point. During that ten minute break, we can take a bio breaks.

We can take you guys can get you a coffee. Unfortunately, we cannot bring you guys the bagels today.

Um. Doing those ten minutes, I can take a look through the, uh, through the questions here in the chat.

But you also work on now the.

Scalar potential of exactly the same configuration.

In the AVF and the AVL. Um, Leeds so augmented.

Lamely pointing towards the foot and the augmented lead, uh, pointing towards the left arm.

All right. So now, according to my watches over here, it's 1125.

Let's say we come back at 1140. I will read through the chat and then we'll discuss, um, the EKGs here for AVF and APL.

All right. Let's take a 15 minute break while we're working on this.

When? Thomas. Can I ask a question about the alien problem like the previous one?

I guess this one's fine too, because the information is the same.

Like you know, it's mentioned in the problem that the velocity of propagation is the same for both tubes.

Is there any significance of that in terms of like how we're mathematically representing the signal, or.

That's just to simplify things, to say that like you don't have to worry too much about like the relative speeds of Propagations

and how that changes the angle between the vectors and therefore the angle and um,

that, um, that vector. So here it's just to simplify.

Okay. And so it's nothing that is baked into the theory here or so.

It's just to simplify and not have to think about an additional parameter.

Okay. Does that make sense? Yeah.

And then when you say that the time needed for the action potential to travel the entire length of cubits point eight seconds,

that's just like the duration of that, like, step function, right when you have that.

Right. Okay. So there's that. Okay. Thank you. So.

Can I ask a quick question also? Yeah. Um, so the reason why we did to a for the previous alien part.

Yeah. Um, was it so I think it was something to do with, like, the cross sectional area.

But I'm trying to see like. Why that is the case in terms of the math.

Like which equation does it correspond to?

Multiplying the amplitude with two. With all of this about the previous question.

So why is why do we? Why did we choose the the the magnitude of the left ha to be two a compared to the to the right hard.

Yeah. So like when we draw, we drew it as if it's, it was like just, um, like constant at two a right.

Yeah. And like why was that?

Or like a corresponds to what here or which equation.

So we could we said a is so we said um let me see.

Let me go back here. Okay. Um, you jump out of this here.

Remember that day that I rode here with my. Yes, I rode here.

That this is. The current density times the cross-sectional area, which let's call it a tilde over here times.

Right. So the current is the current density.

Yeah. Times the area over which the current is actually flowing.

Right. So if you think of the current density as a material property, as sort of an elemental current density,

in order to get the current right, you have to multiply it by the cross-sectional area over which the current density flows.

So that's that's kind of where it enters into into our theory.

In the end we say, well, forget about Jay over here.

We we just we just take a as the magnitude of, of the, um, of the, uh, the current dipole.

And and and the factor of two is just because we didn't want to sort of, you know,

just to make it a little bit more interesting between the right and the left.

The left. Um. The left ventricle.

Okay. I ask a question on that as well?

Sure, sir. Um, so I had originally drawn it as like linearly increasing to two way,

because my thought process was like the way that we drew the magnitude of, um, the end factor to be increasing as it was depolarizing.

But I don't know if in this case it was because it was a cylinder. So it's like as it's propagating up, it's like the same amount as that way.

It's um, horizontal. Okay. Absolutely correct.

So, you know, with with the with the actual human heart rate your recruiting more and more until you have a maximum sort of wave here.

The wave is just going constant at a constant velocity.

Right. And since the cross-sectional area stays constant, essentially what we are assuming is that at any given moment,

the exact same number of cells are participating in that, in that, um, in that depolarization wave.

So that's why it's not like ramping up staying and then coming back down.

So if you had a if you had a taper tube that would go wider, stays current comes back down, you would have something like this right here.

We wanted to make it simple. The moment it depolarize this, you have a constant projection.

And the moment that depolarization is done, boom, you're back at zero.

Okay. Doesn't think you. It's like it's got to this.

Um, can I ask a quick question as well? Um, um, so for the we have three leads, right?

Um, and like all of them give different, um, kind of like shaped waves.

Do they ever get, like, superimposed in their quantitative analysis or are they looked at, like, separately?

Uh, we'll get to that when we talk about how to read a 12 lead EKG so we don't superimpose them on top of one another.

That's what you mean by superposition. We actually look at them, um, almost at the same time.

Um, but, uh, in sort of in chunks of three, as we will see when we talk about the 12 lead electrocardiogram.

Okay. All right. You. Um, I have a quick question about, uh, AVL.

So the it says that the sine is like -30 cosine.

Um, does this, uh, when we're doing projection, does this affect like towards which side.

So if I have uh, vector that's pointing towards the left then that is actually addition instead of subtraction and vice versa.

It changes the polarity of the sign.

Absolutely right. So if we go. Let's see. Um.

Where am I? Can I go back? So, for example.

If so, uh, you were talking about evil. Mhm.

Right. So it's sort of it's it's pointing in that direction.

We only designate the value of -30. But if you, for example, have a, a lead, a uh a current dipole vector that's pointing in the opposite direction,

let's say it, it's pointing sort of um, in this direction over here.

Right. Then the projection onto the AVL vector would be negative.

Right. So in the AVL vector it would be negative in lead one.

It would be negative in lead AVR. It would have a positive projection over here.

Right. Okay. Does that make sense. Yeah yeah that makes sense.

Thank you. Okay. Jump out of here.

Maybe. Maybe five more minutes, and then we resume. Then.

All right, let's let's come back. Um.

I'll bring the alien back up. Here we are.

And, um, so he is our alien heart.

And here's our triangle. Or the our our definition of the various lead configurations.

And the first question was what would be the.

Surface electrocardiogram, given the parameters that we gave in the AVF configuration.

Who wants to take this on? So we're talking about AVF pointing straight down.

Any suggestions? Claudia took us through this last time, so we will not call on her.

Any volunteer. Can it be negative?

Yes it can. I think it starts, um, like, because it's the so the so because there's no projection on the,

uh, left ventricle like propagation direction, I think that's going to be zero.

Um, but for the right ventricle, one um, starting at zero to, um, 0.8, it should be like a negative, um, wave propagating.

Mhm. Okay. Um, and in terms of amplitude, it should be just a because it's just cross sectional.

All right. So what then you have is saying okay we have something that looks like this.

But this is 0.8 over here. Right.

And over here you see that the vector propagation is in the positive you know vertical direction.

Whereas the AVF is pointing from the center here down straight down.

So it's just you know, exactly the opposite direction.

So the projection is constant with negative A over here where A is the magnitude of that current dipole.

All right. So if we go this clear this drawing go to the next slide.

So I'll update the slides over here because I was hiding these slides from you guys.

Obviously this is what AVF would look like.

All right. So now these were the two easy ones right.

One is you know parallel or or antiparallel to the in directionality to the, uh to the left ventricle.

And the other one is uh parallel inter parallel to the right ventricle.

Right. So what about um what about ab what did we say AVL.

Oops. What happened here? It's me.

Some residues. That I just need to take care of.

See, all of this was done last night and this morning.

Because all of this was supposed to be on.

On the blackboard. All right. So did anyone get to AVF.

Uh. Sorry. Abel. Or can walk me through what?

What would be done for Aveo? Share again.

I think someone answered in the chat. Okay.

All right. All right, Tiffany, do you want to take us through?

Yeah. Sorry. Um, since AVL is 30 degrees from horizontal, the magnitude from the right heart is whatever.

Like some magnitude. I call it C Collins cosine of 60 degrees from 10.0 to 0.8.

And then for the left heart it's twice the C.

But now multiply by cosine of 30 degrees from ten .0. 4 to 1.2.

And then you just add them where they overlap. Okay. Thanks.

Exactly right. So um, here's what we had.

Let's go to the next one. So here's our AVL right.

And in the, you know, in the initial period from 0 to 0.4 seconds, the only ventricle that's contributing is the right ventricle.

It has a constant magnitude A right. And so what we need to figure out is what is that projection of a onto our AVL vector.

Right, and that projection in the end will become a over two.

So figure out the trigonometry here. Now, during the next phase.

The between zero point. Uh, four and 0.8 seconds.

We have both the right ventricular depolarization, which stays constant at a over two over here.

Right. But in addition, we have the left ventricular depolarization, which is a constant vector.

Along the, um, along the zero degree axis.

Right? And that contributes eight times square root of three.

Again, it's in the in the trigonometry over here. So the total magnitude that we get over here is a square root of three plus 0.5.

And then between 0.8 and 1.2 6A1 point.

Yeah 0.82 1.2 seconds. Uh, the right ventricular depolarization is over, but the left ventricular depolarization is still happening.

So at that point, we only have the eight times square root of three over here.

And so if we put all of this together.

It looks like this 0 to 0.4 seconds on the right ventricular depolarization, contributing a over two between 0.4 and 0.8 seconds.

It's equal to two plus a square root of three. And then between 0.8 and 1.2 seconds, we have a times square root of three.

And then the depolarization. Wave, or the scalar projection of the electrical activity of that strange configuration onto AVL would look like that.

Right. And we can do checks and balances.

We can say, well, does this make sense? At least directionality directionally.

Well, what we'll see over here right. Is that AVL kind of points in this direction.

And both of these projections will be positive throughout the cardiac cycle at least.

The directionality or the magnitude that the magnitude that the that the um the polarity is positive already makes sense.

All right. Okay, so I hope that clarified a little bit of the, the,

the sort of alien heart problem and how the how the current magnitude, you know, projects onto the, um,

the lead vectors and how we can use sort of these trigonometric relations along with,

you know, with our definitions over here of how to do that projection.

Okay, so let me jump out of this one here. One second.

Clear all of this. Jump out. Move this again!

Out of the way! Okay.

Again, one of those things that is difficult to do over zoom, but that would have been easier in,

in the, you know, on the blackboard is the definition of the mean electrical access.

And when we talk about the mean electrical access we only talk about ventricular depolarization.

So we are only interested in the in in in the time averaged.

Mean orientation of the ventricular depolarization vector.

So what we're showing over here is um, again, we're only looking in the frontal plane.

So only leads 1 to 3 AVL, AVR and AVF.

And what we're doing is we are, um, we are looking, you know, as, as,

as we're going through that depolarization wave, that that vector black vector over here is drawing out this loop.

And the question that we're asking ourselves is what is the mean orientation of that vector?

And one way to do this, to calculate this mean orientation or this mean vector, is to slice up time into discrete elements.

Tend to take the average over all of these discrete elements that we've sliced.

In this case, we start with time equals zero. Then time equals 1 or 1 delta t two delta t all the way to n delta t.

So we have a total number of n plus one slices.

We have n plus one vectors for that particular that spans this loop we take the average over all of them and we get the mean.

The mean vector. Over the course of that ventricular depolarization.

And what this tells us is quite, you know, can be quite important information,

as it tells us a little bit about the electrical orientation of the heart,

which often has also to do with the, um, the physical orientation and in the myocardial mass, um, distribution.

So how can we find the mean electrical axis or this mean vector?

Of course, if you're a computer and you can, you know, any given moment reconstruct these vectors, you can just simply take the average of those.

This is again stuff that is in your notes, but stuff that I would develop normally on the blackboard with you.

But let me take you through what's on the notes. So that you can read through this, you know, at at your leisure.

So any vector. In this plane.

Can be represented. By two lead vectors that obviously cannot be collinear.

Right. Let's say we have one lead vector la and one lead vector.

You remember from, you know, basic geometry, um,

that we can or linear algebra essentially that we can represent any vector in a two dimensional space as we have over here.

Let me go back to my laser pointer over here.

Think of L, A and B as our basis vectors.

Right. And then we can look at this, you know, reconstruct the orientation and the magnitude as a weighted sum of our of our basis vectors over here.

All right. LA and HLB are our unit vectors in this case.

All right. So. The VA and the VB are the weights that we have to assign to these unit vectors.

So VA is then simply m mean dotted into LR and VB is m mean dotted into HLB.

So. Oops. So what I'm going to do, I don't know what I'm doing over here.

So it then follows that our mean vector over here.

Can also be simply represented as the time average.

Of. This. Um.

Um, voltage V a times the unit vector in the load direction and plus the time average of the voltage measured in,

you know, in B times the unit vector in the B direction.

So as we let delta t goes to zero and n goes to infinity.

So we make the transition from the discrete sum to the integral.

What we are saying over here is that our mean electrical access is given by the time average of what we measure,

um, in the voltage on, in, in the Allegra lead and the,

you know, times the LA direction unit vector plus the time average of the voltage that we measure in,

you know, the lead be times the unit vector in B.

And again, I want to emphasize that this is only for the depolarization of the ventricular myocardium.

We only think about the mean electrical axis as the mean electrical axis doing ventricular depolarization.

Now, this is just mathematical, you know, just juggling around, um, how can this actually help us concretely?

So this is just a restatement over here that our V in a mean voltage in A is given by this integral.

The mean voltage in B is given by this integral. But what if we can find a lead vector.

Let's call this. Maybe we should call this, you know la tilde or something.

But well or it happens so that the mean electrical axis dotted into that lead vector is zero.

That can only happen if the integral over the voltage that is measured in that lead vector is actually zero.

Again, over the QRS complex. If that's the case.

Then the mean electrical axis has to be perpendicular to this vector, right.

Because if we have, uh, if, if, if the projection of the electrical activity is zero in this throughout the QRS complex, then the,

you know, by the nature of the dot product M mean has to be orthogonal to that, to that axis or to that to that lead vector.

Right. And that gives us a very quick way of defining the, um, the, uh, mean electrical axis.

Namely, look at the six frontal leads one, two and three.

AVR, AVL and AVF and find the lead.

Who is integral over the QRS complex is approximately equal to zero.

If you if you can find one, then the mean electrical access has to be you has to be orthogonal to that lead orientation.

Whether it's pointing, you know, along the back it's or in which direction, because if it's orthogonal, it could be in two directions.

Right. Which direction we will discern from from the remaining leads.

All right, so here's our orientation. Actually let's jump here first.

Here we have three. See our six projections 123 read only to read three.

Lead AVR it AVL and lead AVF.

All right. We're only interested. We have a P, we have a q r s, and we have a t wave over here, sort of p q r s and t wave over here, right.

P q r us and t wave over here. We're only interested in the QRS complex.

Right now which one of these QRS complex is, if you were to integrate over it?

Would give you approximately zero area. Right.

So that in this case over here would be lead to right.

You have a slight positive deflection. You have a slightly negative deflection of almost equal.

Um. Uh, area. Right.

If you were to integrate just from the beginning to the end of the Kairos complex, you are closest to zero in lead to.

Which means that our mean electrical access. Has to be approximately, maybe not exactly, but approximately orthogonal to lead to.

So here's our lead two. Let me get back to my little pointer over here.

That point to our how do I get back to my. Second.

Uh. Yeah. So our lead two is pointing in this direction, right?

This is our lead two axis. Now we know that we have to be orthogonal to lead two.

So the mean electrical axis is in one of those two directions.

How do we know that it's either pointing in this direction or it's pointing in the opposite direction?

Well, let me erase everything that I've just drawn and let me think.

Look at the other projections. Right?

We know it has to be orthogonal to this one over here. So it could be this direction.

Or it could be this direction. So the question is is it positive?

For example, in lead one, if it's a positive projection in lead one it has to point towards AVL.

Right. And voila! What we see over here, we see a positive deflection in lead one.

Which means that it has to be this one over here, not this direction over here.

So in this case, we can say that the mean electrical axis is pointing approximately in the -30 degree direction.

Okay. So we will look in only in the frontal leads.

123. AVR AVR AVF.

We look for the lead that if we were to integrate over the QRS complex, will give us approximately equal zero.

The mean electrical axis has to be orthogonal to the directionality of that lead.

Now. There couldn't be two options in terms of that orthogonality as you've just described.

Which direction it will point to. You will be able to discern from the other leads.

Whether it's positive or negative in some of the other leads that are pointing in appropriate directions.

Okay. So that's the definition of the electrical axis.

Why do we care? Let me get rid of this again.

Let me come back to my pointer. Why do we care?

Normally our electrical access.

Oh, electrical access or mean electrical access has to do with the myocardial distribution

and how our current sum up and how these currents give us arise give rise to this,

you know, mean electrical vector. Normally we are operating.

In this range over here, somewhere between 0 to 90 degrees plus or minus.

That's normal. But if you have a mean electrical access during ventricular depolarization, that is, um, outside of those quadrants.

So we have, for example, between 0 and -90, right.

Or between um. Uh, 90 and plus 180.

We call this either left axis deviation or we call this right axis deviation.

And those can help us identify abnormalities with our, you know, cardiac orientation but also with muscle distribution.

So. The axis can deviate.

With physical changes of position caused by respiration lying down of body type.

It can point towards ventricular hypertrophy.

Left ventricular hypertrophy causes left axis deviation right ventricular hypertrophy to the right as you will see.

And Doctor Tatro talks about um, uh, conduction abnormalities, blocks of either the right or the left bundle branch.

So left bundle branch blocks HLB, LP cause deviations to the left.

Right bundle branch blocks cause deviations to the right infarctions when muscle tissue

may no longer participate in the electrical activity can also cause axis deviation.

So it's an additional piece of information that can be very helpful in thinking through, um, abnormalities.

Um, in, uh, uh, electrical conduction of the electrical, uh, um, uh, impulse.

But also that can become very helpful when we talk about, um, hypertrophy, additional muscle mass or, uh, infarction when there's loss of muscle mass.

Okay. So there will be additional, um, additional, uh, exercises that we can, you know, go through when we when we read more of the electrocardiogram.

Okay. So let me round out the projection piece by now talking about the chest or what is known as the recording leads.

So we've talked about the frontal lead lead 123 labeled AVR and AVF.

And now we're talking about. Um, the Precor elite.

So we have six front leads, one, two, three AVR, AVL and AVF, and those are, uh,

complemented by six Precor leads that are where the electrodes are placed around the chest, like indicated over here.

And what you're trying to figure out is what is the electrical activity in that, uh, horizontal plane.

And this doesn't project too well. So let me, you know, um, let me improve that, that figure.

I'll try to find a better figure, but we have v1, v2, v3, v4, v5 and v6 and are oriented,

as you see over here in sort of that horizontal plane v1 from the rightmost to the v6, the leftmost electrode.

And we're looking then at electrical activity. Let me actually jump over here.

I'll come back to the heart rate that is then summarized in what is known as the 12 lead electrocardiogram.

So let me orient you here. What we have. Here is time that marches in this direction.

So this is time. Okay. And what the standard electrocardiogram does.

If you hook up the patient, you have a right arm electrode, you have a left arm electrode,

you have a left leg electrode, and then you have these six Precourt elite.

What is shown over here in the first block over here is.

Or maybe actually let me do it. Definitely. The easiest one to think about is the one that's usually at the bottom.

That goes all the way through over here, right?

This is called the rhythm strip. The rhythm strip is one you can select,

which on the electrocardiogram you can select which one of the of these 12 projections you want to have on the rhythm strip as the rhythm strip.

So that is a long recording about I think this is 10s.

Where you have a continuous recording of this particular lead and that lead is indicated over here.

This in our case here is lead to. So this is called the rhythm strip at the bottom.

Okay. And it's it's sometimes good to have a slightly longer recording so that you have

one projection of the electrical activity for a little bit of longer period of time.

Now. The way to think about the other.

Um, piece here of the 12 lead EKG is in terms of these blocks.

Right. We have four blocks of three projections.

And what the electrocardiogram does is that it continuously records.

All 12 projections. But it provides you a visual display of three of these projections at any given time.

So while time is still marching through, you know.

Continuously at discrete intervals.

The electrocardiogram switches between projections.

Standardized. So for the first. I think 2.5 seconds.

It gives you the projections in Leeds one, two and three.

Then it quickly switches, and then it gives you 2.5 seconds of leads.

AVR, AVR and AVF. Then it switches and it gives you three.

The projections of v1, v2 and v3, the first three recorded leads and then in the last projection gives you v4, v5 and v6.

So in each one of these four blocks here.

Here. Here. And here.

Those three projections. Let me focus on the first one.

Are. On the common time axis.

Right. So the time here is exactly the same.

Now, in the second block, the time here is exactly the same. So all three of them are recorded at the same.

Along the same time axis. As a matter of fact, even the rhythm strip is recorded at the same time axis.

And you can see here that the occurrence of the QRS complexes over here.

Actually, let me put back my right. Where's my my pointer or I have my pointer over here.

So here we have a QRS complex. Here we have a QRS complex.

Here we have a Q complex. Here we have a common. They all occur pretty much at the same time right.

So in each one of these four segments. All of these four projections.

You know, the three projections which in each one of these blocks, plus the rhythm strip, they all have the same common time axis.

It's only that at these discrete moments, the egg switches the projections from 1 to 3 to avr, AVL, AVF to v1, v2, v3 and before we five and v6.

And so that in the end is our um, is our uh 12 lead diagnostic electrocardiogram.

All right, let me try to get back my. Let's get rid of all of this.

So this is a very standardized view where the magnitude is shown over here.

Um, the the magnitude calibration is shown over here, and the speed with which this is recorded is also standardized.

And it's usually shown at the bottom and must have been I must have cut it off over here.

Not to confuse people. Oops.

What do we have over here? Let me get rid of this thing.

Let me move this one out of the way. Okay. All right.

Okay. So. This standard 12 lead EKG.

And to Alex's question earlier on in in the lecture, it's good to have multiple projections, many of these different projections.

And yes, you can see, you know, there's some commonality in these projections.

Right. But there's also um, it is you know, it is also gives us usually additional information and as you know,

that, for example, or if I were to ask you here is, you know, can you.

We might be interested in the p-wave activity in atrial depolarization.

You see that there are some leads, for example, lead three over here where you really hardly have any p wave activity.

Right. Now there are other leads, for example AVR over here where you have slightly negative deflection over here, but you can consistently see it.

You can also consistently see it indeed one over here early two over here right away a you know V3 over here you also see electrical activity.

If you see a particular feature or a particular abnormality in, let's say one lead over here,

let's say we would have an abnormality in v3 because v1, v2, v3 and the rhythm strip in this block are all collected at the same time.

It's always good to look at it at these other leads, to see whether you can see the same artifact.

Right. Or whether it's isolated to a particular um, or feature might not have might not have to be an artifact, but at the same feature.

And to see whether that is represented not just in one lead, but across all of these leads, again,

there would be a lot of exercise, a lot of refinement, a lot of, um, um, coming back to these 12 lead EKGs,

especially as Doctor Tatro, um, will speak about abnormalities in rhythm, uh, in impulse generation,

in impulse conduction, uh, and more broadly in, uh, electrocardiogram and electrophysiology.

Okay. So where do we stand?

Let's go back. I skipped over something here. So we talked about the recording lead, the surface electrocardiogram, one of the key information.

One of the most primal, primitive, essential, but essential information that we want to extract from the electrocardiogram is heart rate.

How? Um. Often. And when we talk about heart rate, we usually talk about the the rate at which the ventricles are beating.

So this is a QRS complex over here.

This is the positive deflection is called the R wave right.

And so what we talk about often is the r to r interval or 60 over the r to our interval measured

in appropriate units of beats per minute gives us the rate at which the ventricles depolarize.

So one of the things that we can do is we can count the number of RR intervals in this.

Oh sorry I should say that that the paper here, that is um, uh, this since the speed is standardized.

Right. Um, the distance here of one of these big blocks corresponds to a standard, um, time interval.

In this case, it's point 2 seconds or 200 milliseconds where each one of these small blocks is about 40 milliseconds or 0.0, uh, four uh seconds.

Right. So once we have that timing information, we can count sort of the number of, of intervals,

um, and big blocks and little blocks and um, and then from there derive the heart rate.

Now, another thing that I would have shown you here in, uh, I don't know whether we actually I have this piece of information.

Uh. One second. Uh. I didn't even find.

What we have for you guys is a calipers. So what you see over here, if you look at the distance between zero and the first,

our interval from the first to the second, you can probably appreciate that that interval is very constant.

And what we'll have for you are calipers where you can actually do a measurement.

And you can easily confirm that that interval doesn't change.

Right. So here you have a very regular heart rate.

Right.

You can either count the numbers of big and little boxes and, and and you convert that to a time interval and the time interval to a heart rate.

Or you can follow the algorithm that is given over here.

Or you can follow the algorithm that is given over here.

So. If one of those big blocks of time is zero point, uh, two seconds.

So what? Um, the. Let me find this again.

So here. From here to here, 0.2 seconds.

One if you have a very regular heart rate, one thing that is always.

A trick or a convenient thing to do.

Find yourself a QRS complex where the the R wave coincides as as closely as possible to one of those thick lines over here.

Right. Because then we know that if another bead were to occur over here at the next pick line, that that would only be point two seconds apart.

Now, if another one were to occur over here, this would be 0.4 seconds apart and so on.

Right. If it were one, two, three, four, five blocks away.

Because five times 0.2 seconds.

Is one second. That would be a heart rate of 60 beats per minute.

Right. If you have one beat every second, you have a heart rate of 60 beats per minute.

So one very convenient thing to do is to look across the rhythm strip usually, and to say if I have,

if I can find a keywords complex that is most closely aligned with one of those thick lines.

Right.

Then if there were another QRS complex that were to come at the next thick line that you can confirm would be a heart rate of 300 beats per minute.

Because it would be five beats per second right now.

If you double that interval, you have the rate. So if I go two over, it would be a heart rate of 150.

If I were to go three over, I would divide this rate of 300 by three, and I would have 100 beats per minute.

If I would go for over, it would be 75 beats per minute. Five would, uh, you know, would be one beat per second or 60 beats per minute.

One over would be 50 beats per minute. So 300.

So you align this, you find it yourself across complex.

It's very close to the, um to the thick line 301 5175.

So you see over here that we are very close to 75.

So this to to the next six lines.

So this are our interval of this heart rate corresponding to this, our interval probably around, you know, 7580 beats per minute.

If you really want to be precise you have to, you know, count the small boxes and, and and do a little bit of arithmetic.

But that's a quick way of getting the instantaneous heart rate, which then also becomes the average heart rate.

If you have a very regular pattern of the interval.

So we can exercise this. In the next slide.

So we've seen this over here right. So this is the egg that are 12 degrees CG that I've shown you in the previous.

Um. Um, just a moment ago. So look at this keywords complex over here.

Right. So this is one to the third QRS complex lies conveniently just on top of one of those thick lines.

So if you want to say what is the heart rate, first of all, you would see if you were to pull out your calipers,

you could actually see that that rate is very, very regular.

So if we go one over 301 5175 60, so a heart rate somewhere between 60 and 75 beats per minute.

Again. If you want to be precise, we'll have to count the smaller the smaller boxes right now, because it's also this is the instantaneous heart rate.

And if the if the heart rate is very regular, then the instantaneous heart rate is also um, similar to the to the average heart rate.

Now another thing to recognize is that we're actually showing about ten.

We're showing 10s worth of data here. If you're interested in the average heart rate you can also say how many.

You know ventricular contractions are actually represented here.

Say 12346789 ten.

Right. And so if you have ten contractions over the course of 10s.

Right. Then you multiply this by six in order to get the average heart rate, which in this case would be around 60 beats per minute.

So that's the way of getting at the, you know, at the heart rate and the, um, the ventricular rate.

All right. Um. Getting.

I promise you that there's only one going to be one flight, and you have all my permission to even forget about this slide.

Oftentimes, we get a question. Well, if you have all of these projections in the horizontal plane.

So the pre cordial leads and you have the orthogonal projection in the in the in the front lead, you know, why can't we just reconstruct these loops.

Right. And is there any, um. Uh, is there any value in doing so?

So that gives rise or gave rise to this field of vector choreography.

So at any given moment based on these projections, we can reconstruct the, um, the, the orientation of that dipole.

Right. And what you see over here are three loops.

We have a small loop over here which is the atrial depolarization loop.

Then we have the big blue loop. I mean this this way around which is the ventricular depolarization loop.

And then we have the green loop which is the um the the uh ventricular repolarization loop.

And you can look at this in 3D space and you can look at features thereof and so on and so forth.

Um, there's been there was a big or reasonably sizable field of,

in cardiac electrophysiology and in the engineering applications thereof that looked at this at one point or another.

And it has kind of completely gone to the wayside.

And there was not really anything that was that clinically translated in terms of vector cartography.

I wanted to mention it here because it's an obvious question that if you have projections in the horizontal plane,

you have projections in the vertical plane.

You can reconstruct some of these loops, but the additional information that is provided by reconstructing the entire loops,

rather than the projections as shown in the 12 electrocardiogram, is fairly minimal and has has not translated.

So for the sake of completeness, here it is. You have license to forget.

Okay. So that brings us essentially to the end of the, um, of of the connections of cardiac.

Electrophysiology. Essentially cellular electrophysiology and how to connect the cellular electrophysiology to the surface.

Electrocardiogram. Now the question is, how do we actually go about analyzing these squiggly lines?

And right now I don't want you or we don't want you to engage in a.

Um, exercise of pattern recognition that can come down later when your, uh,

clinical cardiologist like doctor told the doctor Ted rule, right now, the best way to proceed is really algorithmically.

Meaning that what I want you to, to use is an algorithm to, to orient you.

Because these things can get quite complex, and it's very natural to first look at the overt abnormality.

Abnormality that's represented in these, um.

In these, uh, tracings. But one can get very easily swamped by that.

So what what we want to make sure is that we have an algorithm that allows us sort of as a scaffold,

that allows us to anchor our analysis and to actually think through very carefully,

and then look at the abnormality and see whether we can actually connect the connect the

abnormality to a physiological impairment or abnormality that we can pinpoint thereby.

Okay. So what is the what is the algorithm that we want to follow right now.

First and foremost are there find the QRS complexes.

At this stage of your career.

These it's the usually the biggest feature, the most prominent feature of the um electoral uh, of the of the surface electrocardiogram,

as see in this mode is the sharpest it's it's the most, you know, it's the highest amplitude feature.

Can we find them? Yes. What is the rate?

Is the rate regular? Is the shape regular? Right.

That can already give us some hints of what might be happening if the raid is regular, and if the shape is regular.

And if the if they are nice and narrow, as we saw, narrow means less than or the QRS complex less than or equal to about 120 milliseconds,

that usually indicates that once the electrical activity comes through the AV node,

it travels through the electrical conduction pathway,

and the ventricular contraction happens at the same time or very over a very brief period of time,

and that there are no usually no abnormalities at the level of the ventricular contraction.

So ventricular depolarization, I should say. All right.

Once we have the QRS complexes, can we find P waves?

And to find P waves. We will have a lot of examples where we look at single single rhythm strips.

But when we look for p waves in a 12 lead EKG, we usually look across different, different, uh, um, projections.

Right. Um, not just a single lead.

And then the question is, is there a 1 to 1 correspondence?

Right is every P wave followed by a QRS complex, and is every Q complex preceded by a P wave.

In other words, is there a 1 to 1 correspondence and is that corresponding regular?

In other words, is there a constant PR interval interval from the beginning of the pea wave to the beginning of the QRS complex?

Right. That's usually within 120 hundred and 50 milliseconds.

That 1 to 1 correspondence is important. Is the shape regular within each lead right, or does the shape actually change?

If we look, for example, at the rhythm strip and if we have a p-wave in the rhythm strip,

is the shape of the p-wave constant, or does that shape also shift?

All right. 1 to 1 correspondence with every keyword complex preceded by pages.

Prayer followed by a cures complex. What's the shape?

If not every if there are more P waves. Then there are QRS complexes.

Right. That means that not every depolarization of the atria is conducted to the ventricles.

That might give rise to us thinking that there might be something wrong.

Or not normal with the connection. Electrical connection from the atria to the ventricles.

So we would think immediately aha! There might be something wrong with the AV node.

Right. If there's more P waves and there's QRS complex. If that's the case, are there regular patterns?

Are there motifs in which that, you know, abnormality might occur as we will see.

All right. So find the correct complexes. Find the p waves and then define and name the rhythm.

So we will introduce a lot of rhythm supraventricular tachycardia.

We will talk about third degree AV blocks. We will talk about second degree AV block.

You know type. Thank you. Book. Right. The names are not so important right now.

What is more important is that on the basis of our understanding of the normal electrical conduction pathway and what we would expect.

In terms of the projections. Indeed, 123 avr avf one to v1 v2 through v6.

What do we think is the abnormality and what do we think?

The origin, the physiological or pathophysiological mechanistic origin of that abnormality.

So I'm less and less interested in you telling me that this is a dissociation rather than that.

You can explain to me on the basis of what we see in terms of the electrocardiogram, of what it actually means when we use this word.

Okay. All right. So.

We'll close out today with an example. So this is one projection.

It could be a lead. One could be a lead two projection right.

And what we call this over here. Is normal sinus rhythm.

I don't know why I'm telling you this. But let's actually go through this.

Let's go through our algorithm. Do we see QRS complexes?

Let me go here. I would say yes, we do.

Right. We have one over here. Actually, I don't like this screen. Let me go back to rep.

Might be a better contrast. So this looks like a QRS complex.

This looks like a QRS complex. And so on.

This looks like a QRS complex over here. Right. So the first thing of our algorithm is to identify QRS complexes, right.

And if I had my massive caliper and I could show this to you on the big screen downstairs in the lecture hall, you know,

we would go through and say, okay, is the RR interval, is the distance between these QRS complexes approximately constant.

And you can use your fingers and you can actually, you know, see whether that is and it is approximately the case.

All right. Now, number one, we have cubes.

Complexes. Yay! Number two. The spacing of the QRS complexes is approximately constant.

Number three the shape of the QRS complexes.

Look pretty much constant. Right.

So whether I use the fourth or the fifth or the third, third or the first or the seventh, they all more or less look the same.

There's not like some that are vastly bigger than others in terms of or longer than others and vastly bigger than others.

You could kind of cut this out and superimpose on top of one another, and they would all pretty much look the same, right?

Now, the QRS complex should be within about 120 milliseconds.

So if you know the width of the keywords complex should be around three of these small boxes.

And if you were to zoom in over here, you would actually see that's approximately three of the small boxes.

Leaves only one thing for us to do and that is the rate.

Now. Again. What do we want to do? We want to find one QRS complex.

In this case it would be this one over here. Right.

Or it could also be another. This is the only one that we have over here.

And we say, well, this one is false.

Right smack daddy onto one of those thick lines. Right.

So if we go over by one, we have 300 beats per minute by another one 150 beats per minute by another one,

it would be 100 beats per minute and by another 175.

So our heart rate over here, we can immediately say is between 75 and 100 beats per minute.

Right. And if we were to, if we were to do this more carefully, we would actually see that it's a rate of 85 beats per minute.

So we're done with the QRS complexes.

Normal rate. Normal means between 50 and 100 beats per minute.

Regularly spaced. Regular shape.

Normal. Duration less than 100 or less than or equal to 120 beats per minute.

Okay, now the question is what about the P waves?

Do we have p waves? Can we see P waves? Now let me use blue over here.

Yes. Right. We have p q r s t.

We have p q r s t p q r s t.

Right. And. I grant you that sometimes, as we will see, it might be difficult to say, especially if the heart rate is high.

Is this a T wave? Is is a P wave. So things will can get arbitrarily complex right.

Now let's focus on the, on the um, um, on the algorithm.

There is a little wave in front of every cure's complex, and that little wave looks different from that bigger wave over here.

So we have evidence of p q r s t p q r s t p q r s t, and so on.

Right? And the shape of these P waves over here look pretty much all the same, right?

Always positive deflection. Again we could cut them out, superimpose them on top of one another and it would look more or less the same.

Good. So what about 1 to 1 correspondence?

Since we have p q r s t p q r s t. We don't have, let's say pxp and then another p qp.

Right. So it's a 1 to 1 correspondence. Every q complex is preceded by a p wave.

Every p wave is followed by a Q is complex.

So there's a 1 to 1 correspondence which makes us think that the impulse generation originates with.

They say not. Travels across the atria impinges on the AV node.

There's this delay we have. Looks like a normal PR interval of less than or equal to 250 milliseconds.

Right. And then you have that fast ventricular depolarization and then ventricular repolarization.

We call that sequence of p, q, r, s, t, or atrial depolarization a v nodal conduction.

You know, ventricular depolarization. Ventricular repolarization.

Normal sinus rhythm. Normal here because the heart rate is also normal.

And normal sinus rhythm because it's the rhythm is generated at the sino atrial node.

So that's where sinus comes from. Sinus atrial node.

And it propagates through the normal conduction pathway. All right, so let me go and get rid of this thing.

No. We can also have the sinus tachycardia.

I mean that we have a fast heartbeat. Let's go through the algorithm again.

Do we have QRS complexes? Yes we do.

We have these big complexes over here, right? No, I'm not telling you what lead this is.

This is currently not so relevant, right? Whether it's a lead one, two, three, four, whatever.

Rejection is no lead for. But you know projection is not so important.

It's really more the interpretation. So we have QRS complexes.

Again the shape of them all look the same right.

There's not like some that are much wider or much taller than others.

Right. What about the raid here?

The very first one already falls nicely on one of those big lines.

So we have 300, 150/100.

So the next one comes between 100 and 150.

If you were to compute it exactly it's about 125 beats per minute.

So we have a ventricular rate. So we have contributed depolarization.

The irregularly shaped pair have a normal duration.

They are um they are regularly spaced and have a rate that's 125 beats per minute, which is more than what we would expect under normal circumstances.

What about the P waves? Do we have P waves? Yeah, we have them.

Over here, over here, over here and over here.

They might be merged a little bit with the t wave over here.

Right. Because we are at a slightly higher heart rate, but they all kind of look the same.

So. There's no irregularity in terms of the shape.

There's regularity in terms of the timing. And there's regularity in terms of the timing vis a vis the following QRS complex.

And importantly, again, we seem to be having a 1 to 1 correspondence between the P waves r t waves P-wave q r s t wave.

There's no additional. P waves above and beyond sort of the number of QRS complex that we have or there's there are none missing.

Every queries complex is preceded by a T wave, and every T wave is followed by a QRS complex.

All right. Again atrial depolarize sino atrial node depolarization.

Atrial depolarization. We have a p a p r interval that is still about, you know, 150 or so milliseconds.

Right. Sort of nodal delay in the AV node and then fast ventricular depolarization and ventricular repolarization.

Again it's a sinus rhythm.

But because we are above 100 beats per minute, we would call it sinus tachycardia meaning simply meaning that the heartbeat is fast.

But there's nothing else that is wrong here in terms of the conduction initiation and the and the way the propagation of the electrical impulse,

it goes through the normal pathways. And if we have a sinus tachycardia we also have a sinus bradycardia again.

Well now we're indicating to you that this is a lead one configuration.

Right. Do we have QRS complexes. Yes we do. One here, one here, one here, one here and one here.

Is the shape the same? Yes. They all look the same.

They all kind of look the same. You can cut them out, superimpose them all the period or look, you know, look the same.

Um, what's the rate? Is the spacing equal?

Yeah. If we had our calipers, we would demonstrate that the spacing is more or less constant to within a small physiological variation.

But now the question is what is the heart rate. So again the very first one is approximately right on one of those big fat lines.

Going over by one is 301 50, 175 60.

This one is approximately equal on to on this first line, maybe a little bit to the right.

So we're talking about 50 maybe slightly less than 50 beats per minute.

And here we're saying sinus bradycardia because the heart rate is less than 60 beats per minute.

It is below normal. So it's simply um, a bready meaning slow.

Right. So it's bradycardia. Um, but it's still, uh, sorry.

That's the that's the that's the bradycardia part. We talked about the ventricular depolarization.

So the very first bullet on our algorithm. What about the second bullet in terms of p waves.

We have p waves over here right. And as you see that it is kind of has biphasic, uh, shape, but whatever the shape is.

And why it is that way. You see that the shape of the p uh, wave is, um.

Uh, is constant, is not changing. Right.

And every QRS complex is preceded by a P wave, and every P wave is followed by a Q is complex.

So we again have strong evidence to suggest that we are, that the impulse is generated at the level of the p wave.

Going through the A12 myocardium through the AV node into the ventricular conduction system.

From there, quick conduction through the ventricular myocardium and ventricular depolarization.

And then, you know, repolarization over here okay.

Sinus rhythm. Sinus tachycardia.

Sinus bradycardia. All right.

Okay. Maybe in the time that is remaining.

What we have over here is also can be helpful if things get complex.

We have something called a ladder diagram, um, where each one of these lines is almost like a musical score.

But each one of these lines represents an anatomical structure.

And the time between these anatomical structures, um, uh, or the space between these anatomical structures is the space between the,

um, uh, the, the space, the structures that are represented.

So here the first line corresponds to the a V node.

That's sort of the sino atrial node. Then the second line is the atrial myocardium.

Then the third line is the a V node. And then the, the uh the um.

Let's say that. Sorry. The space is sorry. The space in between is the SA node, the atrium, myocardium, the AV node and the ventricular myocardium.

And the horizontal axis. Here is time.

And what this indicates. The space in between is the time it takes for the electrical activity to come out of these various structures.

So we think of the, um, the electrical impulse to start at the sign of atrial node.

And for it to take it takes some time to get out of the signal atrial node.

But once it comes out of the signal, it will note the conduction through the atrial myocardium is actually fairly fast.

So that we just have a drop down of this, um, over here.

Now it hits the the AV node and the conduction through the A.V. node you know, is slow.

The A.V. node delays the conduction, and then it just drops down in very fast conduction through the ventricular myocardium.

So that's what is shown over here. So the way that we use this.

Is that if we have a complex rhythm strip, it's good to orient ourselves, to actually have these different structures and to say,

all right, over here, we have a clearly have a ventricular depolarization.

So that would give rise to that vertical line over here. Here we have an atrial depolarization over here.

We see this in particular in this one bead over here. So we would draw this line over here.

We would connect this line because somehow it has to come from the atria to the ventricle.

That's the a v nodal delay that we have over here. And we usually make a hypothesis of where this originates.

But we can do this with each individual bead.

And that can give us um, rise and can help us identify, um, where you know, what's wrong with, with the conduction pathway.

So I want you to take a minute here, um, to look at this and in your mind, sort of go through the algorithm that we have.

So we have ventricular depolarization.

If yes. Is what is the shape and spacing?

Regular. And what's the ventricular rate?

And second, do we see p waves? Is there a 1 to 1 correspondence between the QRS complexes and the P waves?

What's the shape of the P waves? And then sort of figure out what may or may not be wrong with this, with this rhythm.

So it's a 12:45. Let's maybe take three minutes and then we go through this together.

So again, you know, I think she's complexes.

Are they irregularly spaced? Are they irregular in shape?

What are. You know, what is is the rate.

Um. Uh, the p waves. Can we just turn these p waves?

Are they regularly spaced? Are there regular in shape?

And is there a 1 to 1 correspondence between P waves? Kira's complexes?

Is every Q as complex as preceded by a p wave? Is every p wave followed by a curious complex?

All right. One more minute. Okay.

So do we have QRS complexes? It seems that some of you are nodding.

Yes, we have them here. Here, here, here and here.

Are they regularly? Are they irregular in shape? Uh, yeah, approximately.

Not exactly, but maybe. Right.

So they seem to be nice and narrow. So we're within three of these little boxes.

Right. But this one, for example, looks a little different from the other ones.

What about the rate? 300.

So if you look at this 131 5175 6050.

So this one over here is, uh, less than 50 beats per minute.

What about if you go in the other direction 301 50, 175, 60, also 50.

So seems to be approximately. Same.

So rate is low below 60, right?

So regularly SpaceX's intervals shape more or less the same.

Write rate is low less than less than 50 or 50 beats per minute.

Right. What about. About narrow shape, right?

Narrow shape always suggests to us that it's coming from the conduction pathway,

you know, at or below the bundle, you know, but well, usually the bundle of his.

What about p waves? Do we have ways? Some people are nodding.

Okay. When I usually do this, I start over here in the lecture and then use.

Someone said stop. When I actually hit a p wave.

Okay. Then he says he has a p-wave. All right.

Indicate again by thumbs up. When I actually hit another p wave.

Have to be a little faster. All right.

There was one more and. All right.

So then you have also said so what? If I understood correctly, you said thumbs up over here.

A thumbs up over here. A thumbs up over here for p waves.

Right. Let me continue on over here. Here, here, here, here here here here.

Here. Here. Is there one more? Over here?

Right. Okay. All right.

Anybody else sees any more of your P waves?

Is there one potentially in between the first and the second error that you do?

So Alexa, tell me when to stop. Right there.

Uh, potential. Is this all?

I think there might be one also blocked by the Cure's complex.

The second to last one right there. They're here. Question mark.

I think there's one in between the shrubs and the teeth on the last.

Here. Yeah. All right. Okay, so now look at this.

Now, if that's the case, we would again pick our calipers right.

And see whether these arrows that we've now drawn come actually at a fairly regular interval.

And as you will see, is that this seems to be fairly irregular.

And if we then go back we might actually interpolate another one over here.

Right. Now these can be P waves, right?

It seems that they are irregular, but do we have a 1 to 1 correspondence between the QRS complexes and the and the in and the.

No we don't. Right. It almost seems like.

And let me actually know the beauty of doing it this way.

Otherwise it would have taken out my, my, you know, colored chalk or actually I shouldn't be drawing on the, on the projection thing.

So what you can see over here I'm marking in red the QRS complexes.

Right. The QRS complexes are marching through regularly at a low rate.

But the P waves seem to be marching through regularly also, but in a much higher rate.

What is our what is our p wave rate? So let's find a p wave that starts.

Can we find a p wave that starts approximately at the beginning.

Let's do this over here. Right.

So let's assume that this p wave, the onset of the p wave over here starts more or less at this at this thick line over here,

301 5175 we said that there might be another oops, wrong color.

There might be another P wave over here. Right? So what did we say?

Let's say p wave over here 300 150 175.

So it would be between 75 and might be 80. 85 would be a normal P wave.

Right. We have a normal rate of P waves. And if you look at this paper over here in this paper over here, let's look at the isolated pea waves.

Right. Shape wise, they all look the same, right?

Of course, if they're hidden in a T wave or if they're hidden in the QRS complex, then they might look differently, right?

But it seems that the shape is very similar. The rate is normal.

It's just that the P waves are coming at one rate and the QRS complexes are coming on another,

and they seem to be just marching sort of in and out, right, marching past one another.

So in the last few minutes that we have over here, let me actually march you through this.

So what do we think is happening here? Um, let's go away.

Ventricular aid. We said about 50. Can you find P waves?

Yes. I 1 to 1 correspondence. No, no.

What's the atrial rate? So this is exactly what I've done over here. You see very regular p-wave very regular QRS complexes.

Right here would be something akin to a letter diagram where we have the same nodes firing.

Right. We see that there is that at the onset we have our atrial, you know, depolarization.

But they seem to be a, you know, no correspondence between what the atria are doing and what the ventricles are doing.

Right. And so how can we explain this?

We can explain this that at the level of the a v node, the impulses are blocked.

Right. That's what I've said over here. Complete hard block with nodal escape rhythm.

Remember that the a v node, the sa node, a v node, but also the, uh, the.

Tissue of the conduction pathway below the level of the node. All have other ethnicity.

And if the AV node for some reason is blocked and the ventricles don't see a rhythm,

or don't see a depolarization coming from the atria, which is the highest rate of depolarization.

The ventricles. Would the ventricular conduction pathway would fire at some point, but it would fire at a lower rate than what the atria had.

So here we call this a third degree AV block or complete heart block,

because the atria or the ventricles are blocked from the from the, um, from the impulses coming from the atrium.

Again, the name right now not so important as is on the basis of what we see.

Can we actually reconstruct and can we localize where the issue might be and what the issue might be?

So with that reminder that we have the electrophysiology lab this Thursday during class time, we meet downstairs, uh, in uh,

119, 121 and, you know, down the hallway at the ctor, you would record your own EKG, play around with, uh, recorders.

What to bring? Bring your laptops, as I said, fully charged.

Uh, everything is on canvas for, uh, next Thursday.

So go there, download, um, audacity or the pointers if you don't have Matlab installed, how you can install it from MIT.

And if you want to get on the treadmill, bring your exercise clothes and uh, and uh, protocol, everything is posted on canvas.

Thanks for participating in today's lecture. And, and, uh, um, hopefully this is the last snowstorm for the season.

Or it can we can have more snowstorms. Just stay away from Tuesdays and Thursdays.

That's all I'm asking. All right. Looking forward to seeing you again on, uh, on Thursday in person.

And we'll go over some of this material. So have a good rest of the day tomorrow and see you on Thursday.

Bye. Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you. Uh, super quick question, Thomas.

Yeah. Uh, for Matlab, is online version good or should we have, like, local installations?

I know they recently launched the online version where you don't have to.

I've never played with the online version. So if if it does everything that it does.

Um, as long as you can actually have access to your, um, uh, to the local audio slot, um, it should, it should, uh, it should be fine.

I think it should be okay. I think people last year used the online version, and it was fine.

Okay. See? I didn't see it. All right. Thanks. Yeah.

Valerie. Yeah. I just had a quick question about complete heart block.

So in this case, like is the way to interpret it that the SA node is actually firing normally and the atria contracting normally,

but then the ventricles are not getting this information because of a blockage at the AV node.

Because the way I was thinking about it before was like,

maybe there's like the ventricles are beating normally, but then there's no feedback to the atrium.

I, you know, that's like keeping the heart in the same rhythm.

But I guess that's kind of backwards because the SC node is the normal pacer of the heart.

The S.A node is a normal pacer of the heart, and there's no feedback of the type that you just mentioned,

in the sense that the ventricle feeds back to the atria.

So the the highest rate to the rate is determined by the fastest pacemaker.

And that's usually the SA node. And everything is is is working properly.

It just propagates through the atria through the AV node into the ventricles.

But it wouldn't some reason the AV node is is damaged and doesn't conduct the signal right.

Then eventually tissue that is further down in the AV node or in the common bundle of his will

actually generate a ventricular rate that's much lower than what the atria would provide.

So the signal, it's like the node that's receiving input from the rest of the body that,

like all the metabolic demands are going up, we need like more oxygen needs to pump faster or slower to go to first order.

Yes. But that input also goes to the AV node or to the rest of the myocardium, as we will see when we talk about the control.

But in terms of rate, yes, the modulation of the rate under normal circumstances is mostly related to,

you know, what's happening at the level of the AC node. Um, but when the heart actually wants to, wants to, let's say accelerate, right?

It's not just an influence on the assay node, but it's also an influence on the AV node.

Because if you also want to accelerate the conduction through the AV node, right.

So I'm thinking normally the pacemaker of the of the normal heart rate is or the normal rhythm is at the level of the node.

Okay. Thank you. Sure. I'm all right.

Yeah. Tom, had a quick question. Um, so we're talking about, like, the mean electric cardiac vector and then the mean sort of the axis,

cause I think we're talking about like, sort of like some of the other stuff in, in, like just the vector end up being like horizontal.

So I was just, I think I was lost in there somewhere. I just didn't see how they connect.

Okay. Let me let me bring this up. Um. Let me see.

So let me go back. So what I was saying over here, um.

Let me go. Maybe here. Right. Okay, so what we said.

So there's a there's a bunch of is is it more about the math or is it more conceptual?

I think it's more conceptual. Okay. So here what we're saying is you have you have this loop.

Yeah. And you can define a mean vector.

Right. A time average of all of these little of, of all the vectors in the loop.

You can define a time average right. Yeah. Then the question became how do we actually find this.

A computer can do that right. But how can we actually do this ourselves.

And that's where sort of the math came in. Right.

And and where we said, well, if we actually, if we actually have two basis vectors, but the main recognition is, is down here.

Right. If you can find a lead vector le right, such that the integral over that projection over the QRS complex is approximately equal to zero.

So if I integrate from the beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the QRS complex, and if the if the amount of,

you know, area above this line and below the baseline is more or less the same, right.

Doesn't have to be zero. It can just be opposite directions right of approximately equal magnitude.

Then we know that because this is a dot product over here, then we know that this mean axis has to be orthogonal to that vector.

Does that make sense? Yes. Right now.

Then I said, all right, let's apply this over here. So here the lead two.

If we were to integrate from, you know, from the beginning to the end of the QRS complex, approximately equal.

In, in, you know, uh, sorry, uh, approximately zero if we integrate over it, which means that in this case, let me get this out of the way.

In this case, this is, uh, this is, uh, lead Avi, uh, this, uh, this is lead to over here.

Right? So at this point, we know that our mean axis has to be orthogonal to lead to lead to is our plus 60 degree.

So it must be orthogonal to this dashed line over here.

Right. Right. Now it could be pointing this direction or it could be pointing the other direction.

So we have to disambiguate that. Right?

Yes. So how do we did some weight? That is okay.

We know that our lead one is pointing in this direction, right?

Uh, that's it right. Now, if it's positive in lead one as we see over here.

Right? Right. Must be pointing into the -30 degree.

If it were negative, if we were to see a negative deflection in lead one over here.

And you can you can you could also pick two if you want. Right. Okay.

Then it would have to be pointing in the opposite direction.

And it would be minus or plus 150 degrees over here. Does that make sense.

Yeah. So this would be a left deviate a left axis deviation a exactly.

This would be a left axis deviation. Correct.

Got it. Okay. Yep. That's that was very clear. Thanks.

